China's Home-Price Gains Spread as Easing Measures Spur Demand
['Bloomberg News']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-18/china-s-home-price-gains-spread-as-easing-measures-spur-demand
China’s home-price gains accelerated last month as the nation’s economic hubs such as Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen continued to lead the way amid surging liquidity that underpinned demand.

New-home prices excluding government-subsidized housing climbed in 62 cities, compared with 47 in February, among the 70 cities tracked by the government, the National Bureau of Statistics said Monday. They dropped in eight cities, compared with 15 a month earlier.

Beijing March New Home Prices Rise 16% on Year

The government moved away from a one-size-fits-all property stimulus last month to allow more tailored approaches at the local level, after loosening measures sparked frenzied buying in top hubs. With no more stimulus from the central government to boost smaller markets, and local authorities moving in to take the steam out of overheating markets such as Shanghai and Shenzhen, the recovery’s sustainability is coming into question.

Given price growth in the past months and tightening measures, “any further increases in first-tier cities going forward should be mild, if any,” Jeffrey Gao, a Hong Kong-based analyst at Nomura Holdings Inc., said by phone.

Xiamen, Shenzhen

Out of the 62 cities with price gains last month, 55 had faster increases than in February, according to the statistics bureau. The average new-home price rose 0.85 percent in March, up from 0.38 percent in the previous month, according to Bloomberg calculations based on government data.

Gains were led by a 5.4 percent jump in the port city of Xiamen in southern Fujian province, followed by a 4.6 percent increase in Hefei, capital of eastern province Anhui. Prices in the southern business hub of Shenzhen rose 3.7 percent from a month earlier and 63 percent from the same period last year, the biggest year-on-year increase among the 70 cities. Those in Shanghai and Beijing climbed 4.3 percent and 3.3 percent, respectively.

“Although the vast majority of cities saw price gains month on month, the difference in the gains remains relatively large across cities,” the statistics bureau said in a statement released with the data. The fastest price increases were mainly in first- and some second-tier places, with the less economically significant third-tier ones remaining “relatively stable.”

Sales Jump

Prices in March gained in 60 cities among the 100 tracked by SouFun Holdings Ltd., the owner of China’s biggest property website, compared with gains in 61 the previous month. Average new-home prices roses 1.9 percent from February, when they advanced 0.6 percent.

The value of homes sold jumped 71 percent in March to 869.8 billion yuan ($134.1 billion) in the biggest year-on-year increase since at least 2015, according to Bloomberg calculations based on statistics bureau data released last week. Investment in real estate development climbed 6.2 percent in the first quarter from a year earlier, extending the increase from the first two months when it reversed a two-year falling streak.

Cheap Credit

The pick-up, fueled by cheap credit, helped China’s fixed-asset investments jump 10.7 percent and gross domestic product to stabilize at 6.7 percent in the first quarter.

Existing-home prices increased last month in 54 cities from the previous month, compared to 34 in February. They declined in 13 cities and were unchanged in three.

While new housing construction jumped 19.2 percent in March and drove raw commodity prices higher recently, the uptick in construction will be short-lived, Louis Kuijs, chief Asia economist at Oxford Economics in Hong Kong, wrote in a note last Friday.

“While the short-term pick-up in property construction is for real, we do not think that it will translate into a sustained recovery until housing sales have been growing healthily for a prolonged period and inventories of unsold housing have come down more significantly,” Kuijs wrote.

The price recovery is unlikely to trigger any broad tightening across second-tier cities given the need to bolster property sales and investment, Gao said. “The impact on sentiment would be too big,” he said. “Even if there’s any tightening going forward, it will be restricted to some individual cities. And it will be mild.”
