Portugal's Centeno Studies Italy's Fund to Fix Bad-Debt Burden
['Alessandro Speciale']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-17/portugal-s-centeno-studies-italy-s-fund-to-fix-bad-debt-burden
Portugal is looking at Italy’s bank-rescue fund Atlante to see if it can be a model for reducing the burden of distressed debt on its financial system, Finance Minister Mario Centeno said.

“It’s still in its infancy but it’s something we are working very hard on,” Centeno said in an interview in Washington on Saturday. “We’ll verify if it is national funds or funds that you maybe attract from outside the system, that will also be key to the design and incentives.”

Centeno, who was in Washington for the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, said he met with advisers working on Atlante, which will be financed by banks, insurers and institutional investors including a state-backed lender, and is meant to help local banks by buying their riskiest soured loans. Portugal may require a somewhat different solution, he said.

“The similarities and the differences will have to do with the type of assets that you have to include in the fund, if it’s real estate assets or more credit to firms,” he said. “This makes the components of the fund different from what you have in Italy.”

Italy’s Finance Minister Pier Carlo Padoan said on Saturday that the private-fund approach is “highly exportable,” and is seen as an “example of best practice” at the international level.

Non-Performing Loans

Portugal and Italy are among the six European countries with a non-performing loan ratio above 10 percent, the Bank of Portugal said in January. State-owned Caixa Geral de Depositos SA, the country’s largest lender by assets, will have to raise money to bolster its finances.

Centeno said a decision on the capital increase, which will require the approval of the European Commission and the European Central Bank’s supervisory arm, will come after the appointment of a new management team for the bank and the design of a new business plan.

“The new board is something that we are tackling as we speak,” he said. “The process of interaction with Brussels and the ECB is something that will start immediately, and during 2016 this issue will be clarified.”

Novo Banco

Prime Minister Antonio Costa said on Friday he won’t defend any further injections of public money into Portuguese banks given the levels of corporate indebtedness and non-performing loans in the country.

Fixing the country’s banking system will also involve the Bank of Portugal selling Novo Banco SA, which was set up in 2014 following the breakup of Banco Espirito Santo SA. Last month, the central bank said it could be sold to another lender or a wider group of investors.

Centeno said a roadshow for Novo Banco is currently underway and that the feedback has been “very good so far.”

“There’s lots of interest in the operation -- I have been told that more than 50 companies and banks showed interest in the process,” he said.

Economic Prospects

Even though global economic prospects have been weakening, Portugal is sticking to its 2016 growth forecast of 1.8 percent, after early data point to stronger output at the end of the first quarter.

“The quarter didn’t start very strongly but the numbers for February and March are very strong,” Centeno said. “We are not revising it yet.”

Portugal targets a budget deficit of 2.2 percent of gross domestic product in 2016, narrower than the European Union’s 3 percent limit. Debt is foreseen to decline to 127.7 percent of GDP this year from 128.8 percent in 2015.

Costa was sworn in as prime minister at the end of November. His minority Socialist government plans to reverse state-salary cuts faster than the previous administration proposed, while increasing indirect taxes. Costa says his government will be propped up in parliament by the Left Bloc, Communists and Greens, which haven’t followed the Socialists in backing European budget rules in the past.

“Dialogue is the nature of politics, that’s precisely what we have been doing since we are in office,” Centeno said. “Of course we have very different positions vis-a-vis very important topics but these topics will not block government action.”

Portugal’s 10-year yield was at 3.2 percent on Friday after touching 4.5 percent on Feb. 11, the highest since March 2014. It peaked at 18 percent in 2012 at the height of the euro region’s debt crisis.
