'Brexit' Outcome Depends on How the Don't-Knows Vote, If At All
['Deborah Hyde']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-24/-brexit-outcome-depends-on-how-the-don-t-knows-vote-if-at-all
Opinion polls are now in focus ahead of the U.K. referendum on the nation’s membership of the European Union, as investors search for clues on whether recent events helped undecided voters make their minds up if Britain should stay in or leave the Union.

Developments that could have had some influence include the testimony by London Mayor Boris Johnson, who backs the U.K. leaving the EU, and Chancellor George Osborne, who supports ongoing membership. The resignation of minister Iain Duncan Smith, who supports the nation’s exit from the Union, and the bomb attacks in Brussels also are likely to have an impact on opinions.

The British pound’s three-month implied volatility against the dollar has jumped to the highest levels since June 2010 as investors look to hedge against wider swings that may be fueled by the odds of a potential exit.

What's the latest?

An ICM survey conducted between March 18 and March 20 showed a reversal of the prior week’s two-point lead for the “remain” camp, with 43 per cent saying they would vote for leave; 16 per cent remain undecided.

Before that poll, Prime Minister David Cameron said the result is on a knife edge and could be decided on who bothers to vote. Duncan Smith quit over the weekend, plunging the ruling Conservative Party into one of its biggest crises since 2010, something Morgan Stanley analyst Hans Redeker says may increase “Brexit” risks. UBS Wealth Management economist Bill O’Neill say the dynamics between local party organizations, members of parliament and the ministers will also be of interest.

While the polls didn’t shift significantly after London Mayor Johnson said he will backing “leave,” analysts say he can sway voters if he starts to campaign more actively. Today, he told members of parliament that the risks related to ‘Brexit’ have been overplayed, the U.K. could do a deal with the EU after a ‘leave’ vote very quickly and the City of London would flourish.

The Bank of England joined the debate this month, saying uncertainty stemming ahead of the vote may delay investment decisions and curb growth, although the bank’s Monetary Policy Committee member Kristin Forbes went on to say this week there’s not yet enough data to estimate the effects. Prologis, the world’s largest owner of industrial real estate, would like to buy more property in Britain but said it’s unlikely to do so before the country decides whether it wants to stay in the EU or not. Global investors have cut their allocation to U.K. equities this month to net 20 per cent underweight from net 17 per cent underweight.

What's next?

Chancellor Osborne is scheduled to speak to MPs about the economic impact of the referendum. The Electoral Commission’s deadline to determine the official “leave” and “remain” campaigns is April 14. The decision gives the lead campaign groups higher spending limits. The following day marks the start of the referendum period.

The EU response to the Brussels attacks and the successful implementation of a deal with Turkey to stem the flow of migration will be key factors to watch, with JPMorgan saying the successful implementation of those would lower the likelihood of ‘Brexit’.

UBS Wealth analyst Ricardo Garcia says if such measures lead to lower inflows of migrants, that would be more important in voter minds than this week’s events in Brussels. Once the campaign starts formally and Prime Minister Cameron campaigns more pro-actively, it will be important to see if the undecideds make up their minds and which campaign they back; expect most to favor staying in the EU, he adds.

Rabobank analysts say the implications of the Brussels attacks aren’t entirely clear as posturing by the anti-Europe UKIP could tarnish the party, and it is possible the attacks elicit both sympathy and solidarity from the U.K. population, given their long history of living with the threat of terrorism.

What's the likely referendum outcome?

Opinion polls show the remain and leave campaigns fairly balanced, but with “don’t-knows” ranging between 16 percent and 28 percent in surveys since the end of February.

ITV/ComRes says the lead for remain narrowed in its telephone poll, to 48 percent vs 41 percent. In a February 22 phone poll, the result was 51 percent for remain vs 39 percent.

Surveys done this way, rather than online, have tended to show far greater support for staying in the EU.

Citigroup says 38 percent of polls so far this year show a majority voting for an EU exit, compared with 16 percent in the second half of 2015. RBC analysts say betting markets are a better gauge of implied probabilities and these show a jump in the likelihood of a leave vote in recent days to near their peak around 40 percent. UBS Wealth sees around 30 percent chance of Brexit while Citigroup put the likelihood at 30 percent to 40 percent.

What happens if the remain camp wins?

The vote may spur persistent political and economic uncertainties that may not end even if the country votes to stay, according to Citigroup economist Michael Saunders. Even if the U.K. voted to remain in the EU, those divisions could lead to an early election, Morgan Stanley analysts led by Jacob Nell say. Even with a ‘remain’ vote, slower growth and weaker inflation would push the first rate increase back to early 2017, they add.

ING economists disagree. If the U.K. votes against Brexit, the BOE could lift rates as soon as November, according to global head of rates strategy Padhraic Garvey. BNY Mellon chief market strategist Simon Derrick points out that pound strength after the Scottish referendum faded just hours after the result. Morgan Stanley says the British currency could recover slightly but won’t retrace all of its losses since mid-2015.

Julius Baer economist David A. Meier sees asymmetrical downside risks for sterling. They don’t believe in a long-lasting relief rally in case of a “No” vote and see a slightly weaker euro against the pound at 0.84 on a 12-month horizon.

What happens on a Brexit?

There’s much debate about what happens immediately after the vote with EU provisions suggesting negotiations can take up to two years and some commentators saying that period could be extended if needed.

In the worst case, the economy shrink 3.9 percent by 2030 compared with staying in the bloc and 21.1 billion pounds of business investment would be lost, according to Oxford Economics. The best case sees a loss of 0.1% in gross domestic product. The pound may fall between 10 percent and 20 percent, analysts from Barclays to HSBC estimate.

British manufacturers, retailers and universities may see their credit ratings drop and economic growth may slow if the U.K. votes to leave, Moody’s Investors Service says.

Fund managers Aberdeen, Henderson face the largest operational risks in a ‘Brexit’ scenario, and the U.K. retail sector may “de-rate”, according to UBS.

A vote in favor of an exit will spawn the deepest market slump since the Greek debt crisis and the region’s high-yield bonds will be among the biggest losers, analysts and investors at Euromoney’s Sixth Annual European High Yield Bond Conference in London said this week. Credit Suisse economists say a Brexit event would have wide-ranging negative economic consequences beyond the U.K., most likely including a recession in the euro area, something that doesn’t yet appear priced in the G-10 currency option prices.

How to trade it?

Longer-term investors don’t appear to be adequately hedged against Brexit risk, JPMorgan strategists including Paul Meggyesi wrote in note this week. Nomura recommends a tactical short position in the pound against the dollar, expiring June 21.

HSBC says buying Swiss francs is the best hedge against the risk of Brexit. ING analysts recommend sterling strip steepeners, buying December 2016 and selling December 2017 contracts, given the rate-increase cycle may begin soon after a remain vote and any easing on a leave vote may be reversed next year.

Brexit risks and increased asset purchases by the European Central Bank also present a bullish case for long-end euro bonds, and so investors should enter conditional 10-year-30-year “bull-flattener” trades with a one-month expiry, SocGen strategists led by Vincent Chaigneau say. In stocks, Barclays analysts recommend U.K. stocks with dollar exposure, FTSE 100 companies and consumer staples.
