Asian Stocks Slide to Extend Monthly Loss Amid China Volatility
['Yuji Nakamura']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-11-30/asian-stocks-slide-after-chinese-selloff-as-material-shares-drop
Asian stocks fell as Chinese shares were whipsawed after their biggest one-day selloff in three months. Consumer-staple and utility companies led losses on the benchmark index at the start of a pivotal week for the region’s markets.

The MSCI Asia Pacific Index dropped 1 percent as of 7:10 p.m. in Hong Kong, headed for a monthly loss of 2 percent, its sixth such decline in seven months. The Shanghai Composite Index erased a loss of as much as 3.2 percent to close 0.3 percent higher, as a gauge of volatility traded near its highest level in two months. That follows a 5.5 percent plunge on Friday, its largest since the depths of a market rout in August, as regulators clamped down on brokerages.

The regulator’s move was “a positive because they were investigating brokers, which is a sign they don’t want another bubble to form,” said Mark Matthews, head of Asia research and a managing director at Bank Julius Baer & Co. in Singapore. The Chinese stock market, “if it’s not controlled, moves in these boom-and-bust cycles, and it was definitely heading for another boom.”

Chinese shares since Friday

Banks and property developers led gains in a gauge of financial companies that has the heaviest weighing in the CSI 300 Index. China Citic Bank Corp. rose 3 percent and Poly Real Estate Group Co. added 4.4 percent in Shanghai. The nation’s securities regulator is investigating Citic Securities Co., Haitong Securities Co. and Guosen Securities Co. over alleged breaches of rules on margin and short-selling contracts. Brokerages extended declines, with Guosen taking its two-day loss to 12 percent.

Regional Gauges

Japan’s Topix index declined 0.9 percent, with insurance companies and shippers leading losses. Dai-ichi Life Insurance dropped 2.9 percent, while Mitsui OSK Lines Ltd. slumped 3 percent.

Data on Monday showed Japan’s industrial production rose 1.4 percent in October from a month earlier, missing economists’ forecasts for a 1.8 percent gain. Retail sales jumped 1.8 percent from a year earlier, beating economist estimates for a 0.9 percent increase.

South Korea’s Kospi index dropped 1.8 percent. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Index fell 0.3 percent and Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 Index lost 0.7 percent.

E-mini futures on the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index rose 0.1 percent after the underlying gauge climbed 0.1 percent in a shortened session Friday. As investors await Friday’s payrolls figures for November, traders are now pricing in a 76 percent chance the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates in December.

ECB Meeting

European policy makers meet Dec. 3 to discuss monetary policy and what the ECB can do to prop up sluggish inflation within the region. The central bank is considering cutting its deposit rate further below zero and adding to its program of quantitative easing.

International Monetary Fund Managing Director Christine Lagarde and some two dozen officials on the fund’s executive board gather Monday in Washington to decide whether to grant China’s yuan status as a reserve currency by adding it to the fund’s Special Drawing Rights basket. While Lagarde has already announced that fund staff had recommended the yuan be included and that she supported the finding, the IMF is likely to give more details on how it arrived at the decision.

This week also sees a policy decision from the Reserve Bank of Australia, while members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries will gather in Vienna.
