Here Come the Tax Day Deals, From Cut-Rate Hotel Rooms to Free Shredding
['Suzanne Woolley']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-08/here-come-the-tax-day-deals-from-cut-rate-hotel-rooms-to-free-shredding
The Internal Revenue Service sent out more than $330 billion in refunds to U.S. taxpayers last year. To capture some of this year's cash, and jump on a marketing opportunity, companies are offering freebies and discounts celebrating the end of the annual filing ordeal.

Here's a roundup of what's on offer. Unless otherwise noted, prices are, sadly, before taxes.

Food and drink

Discounted dinners: Visitors to Boston Market on Tax Day, April 18, can get a half-chicken individual meal with two sides, cornbread, a regular fountain drink, and a cookie for $10.40, in honor of the awful form. Without the promo deal, the tab would be $11.77 at many Boston Market restaurants. At Outback Steakhouse restaurants, diners can get 15 percent off their check on April 18 . To get a coupon, go to the web site's Offers section and sign up for emails. You'll also get the coupon if you download Outback's mobile payment app. If barbecue's more your thing, Sonny's BBQ will offer half-price Sweet & Smokey or House Dry-Rubbed Rib Dinners on Tax Day. No coupon necessary.

Free kids meal: On April 18, parents who bring their "little deductibles" to Noodles & Company get a free kid's meal when they buy any regular entree, a $5 savings. And those who order online between April 11 and 18 can get $4 off orders of $10 or more by entering the promo code TAXDAY at checkout .

Half-off drinks: All alcoholic beverages will be half off at the BLT Prime restaurants in New York and the Trump National Doral resort in Miami on April 18. The same deal applies at BLT Steak restaurants in New York, Charlotte, Waikiki, Washington, D.C., and White Plains, N.Y. Other ESquared Hospitality restaurants taking part in the promotion: New York's Casa Nonna, Horchata, and the Wayfarer, and the Florentine in Chicago.

Free beer: World of Beer taverns will offer patrons a free select draught on April 18. Guests in Arizona, Texas, North Carolina, Virginia and New York get $5 off their check instead.

Free sandwiches: Schlotzsky's is giving customers a free small Original sandwich with the purchase of a 32-oz. drink and a bag of chips on April 18. Random prizes will be awarded to fans who upload a picture of their free sandwich to Twitter or Instagram using #TaxDayBites.

Discounted margaritas: Guests get $5 Presidente Margaritas (that’s tequila, orange liqueur, and brandy) at participating Chili’s.

A burger for a song: The Hard Rock Cafe in New York City's Times Square (and 42 other Hard Rock Cafes in the U.S.) on April 18 hosts Sing for Your Supper on Tax Day. From 5 to 7 p.m., anyone over 18 in Times Square who wants one of the chain's Legendary Burgers for free must sing karaoke outside the restaurant, on 43rd and Broadway. The burger is $17.95 for those who can't, or won't, sing.

Free burgers, no song required: Ohioans can enjoy some McDonald's deals on Tax Day. Participating locations in Dayton and Cincinnati will offer those who buy a Big Mac or Quarter Pounder a second one for 18¢. In Toledo, customers can get a second Quarter Pounder for 18¢. And in northeast Ohio, customers who buy one Sausage McMuffin with egg or Big Mac can get another one for 29¢ at participating locations. Hungry taxpayers who prefer burgers from Sonic Drive-In can get half-price single-patty cheeseburgers on April 18.

Free coffee: Participating McDonald's in Arizona, Vermont, Colorado, and Wyoming are offering tired taxpayers a free small coffee on April 18.

Free shaved ices: Kona Ice trucks will offer free shaved ice on April 18 “to help anxious tax payers CHILL out.” The usual cost is $3 to $5, depending on the location. To find out if one of the company's 700 trucks is in your area, tweet your zip code to @KonaIce.

Free dessert: Leading up to Tax Day, people who sign up for Tony Roma's Email Club will get a coupon for a free dessert in their e-mail, valid through April 29. Those who eat at a participating location on Tax Day—the majority of restaurants offering the deal are in Florida, New York, Texas, and California—will get a dessert coupon to use on their next visit to a participating location.

Sweepstakes

Fly-fishing gear: Orvis has upped its Tax Day Giveaway game this year, offering not just a fly-fishing rod but a set of fly-fishing gear that includes waders, wading boots and more. To enter, type your email in the widget on its web site (use the widget even if you're already on their email list). Then tell them where you'd use the gear first. The contest runs through April 29.

Services

Shredding: On April 18, taxpayers can get five pounds of paper shredded for free at Staples stores across the country. At Office Depot and Office Max, print out a coupon from the website or show one on your phone and get five pounds of bulk bin shredding now through April 23.

Spa deals: The Hand & Stone spa franchise, with about 150 locations in the U.S. and Canada, offers members getting a one-hour massage or facial a "1040 EZ Upgrade" of a hot towel hand or foot massage, peppermint scalp massage, or mini cold stone face massage for $10.40 extra. Guests and members can get a one-hour massage or facial itself for $39.95, a $10 discount. Oasis Day Spa, with locations in New York and Westchester, N.Y., is giving taxpayers 15 percent off all spa services from April 11 to 15. Tax preparers get 15 percent off in-office services such as massage.

Free hydromassage: Planet Fitness and HydroMassage are offering anyone 18 or older a free HydroMassage from April 18 to 22 at more than 1,000 of the fitness chain's locations. Coupons can be downloaded from the Planet Fitness web site starting April 18.

Travel

Gambling
