In Rubble of Commodity Super-Cycle, Citigroup Picks Winners
['Pratish Narayanan']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-12-01/in-rubble-of-commodities-super-cycle-citigroup-picks-winners
There’s still money to be made from investing in commodities, according to Citigroup Inc.

While a rising U.S. dollar, sustained oversupply and slowing growth in emerging markets including China are still hurdles to a recovery, many markets may strengthen in the second half of next year as the collapse in prices shrinks production, the bank said in a report. Citigroup also forecasts “a more persistent price recovery by 2017 for oil and base metals, and possibly agriculture.”

The bank predicts the start of a recovery in some raw materials as returns from commodities head for a fifth annual drop amid the slowest growth since 1990 in China and the prospect of a stronger dollar if U.S. interest rates increase. Citigroup sees “plenty of opportunity ahead for investors” as it believes that in most cases futures prices are below fair market value, both in a six to 12 month period and, more particularly, beyond.

“Citi’s outlook for end-2016 projects higher prices for U.S. natural gas, crude oil, all base metals but especially copper and nickel as well as platinum and palladium,” analysts including Ed Morse said in the report. It also sees prices “mildly up across the staple cereals, but weak to very weak across the bulks. In short, a modest recovery.”

A sharp decline in U.S. drilling rigs should cut energy output growth, mining supply reductions may support a rebound in some metals and adverse weather may help crop prices, Citigroup said.

If investors begin to see signs of stability in prices or a recovery in 2016, they will resume pouring money into energy-linked funds, according to Citigroup. That should especially boost flows into passive indexes, where as much as 60 percent of all major measures are allocated to energy commodities, it said.

Investments in exchange-traded funds may be hurt given the bank’s forecast for weaker gold prices, Citigroup said. Bullion represents 80 to 85 percent of the ETF market. Cumulative inflows into commodity-linked ETF and passive index investments stand at $18.8 billion in 2015, compared with net outflows of $22 billion in 2014 and $50 billion a year before that, it said.

Raw materials were in a bull market for about a decade until 2011 amid a so-called super-cycle, powered by a surging economy in China, the biggest consumer of energy, metals and grains. That prompted an unprecedented expansion in production capacity and now, as the Asian nation’s growth slows, it’s led to an oversupply in everything from steel to oil and copper.

The Bloomberg Commodity Index is down 22 percent this year, heading for the biggest annual decline since the global financial crisis in 2008. The measure of returns from 22 raw materials plunged to the lowest level since 1999 last month amid signs of weakness in China and as speculation the U.S. Federal Reserve will raise interest rates boosted the dollar and reduced the appeal of raw materials.
