Pakistan Inflation Accelerates as Floods Destroy Crops, Roads
['Khurrum Anis', 'Farhan Sharif']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2010-09-09/pakistan-inflation-faster-than-estimates-as-floods-destroy-crops-roads
Pakistan’s inflation accelerated more than economists estimated after the nation’s deadliest floods damaged crops and washed away roads and bridges, hurting supplies of farm and manufactured goods.

Consumer prices rose 13.23 percent in August from a year earlier after climbing 12.34 percent in July, the statistics department said on its website today. The median of 14 estimates in a Bloomberg News survey was for a 12.4 percent gain.

Rising prices may put pressure on Shahid Kardar, who was appointed as Pakistan’s new central bank governor today, to increase interest rates, already among the highest in the world. That may impede investments and undermine economic growth, which Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani estimated at 2.5 percent in the year through June, 2 percentage points less than the government’s target.

“The damage from floods has started to show in inflation numbers,” Sayem Ali, an economist at Standard Chartered Pakistan Ltd. in Karachi, said before the report. “That might lead to further tightening of monetary policy.”

Kardar, 57, said his primary task is to cool inflation. Consumer-price gains in the South Asian nation are the highest in Asia Pacific, according to data from 17 countries in the region tracked by Bloomberg.

The State Bank of Pakistan on July 30 increased its discount rate to 13 percent from 12.5, boosting the benchmark for the first time in four meetings. The bank is scheduled to unveil its next policy statement at the end of the month.

‘Control Inflation’

“My priority is to control inflation and ensure soundness and security of the financial system,” Kardar said in a telephone interview today. Kardar, a director at the Royal Bank of Scotland Pakistan, will replace Syed Salim Raza, who quit in June. He will take charge at the State Bank on Sept. 14 for a three-year term.

The inflation rate may climb as the government estimates the floods to have damaged $1 billion of crops, causing shortages. Pakistan will harvest 4.4 million metric tons of rice in the marketing year that starts Nov. 1, down 35 percent from the previous year, according to a report by a unit of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

The Food and Agriculture Organization has called for funds to replace half a million tons of wheat seed stocks depleted by the floods, with planting of the staple due to take place over the next three months.

Gilani said Sept. 1 the natural disaster has destroyed 4,000 kilometers of roads and 1,000 bridges, pushing up the cost of delivering goods and services. He estimated the inflation rate to climb to between 15 percent and 20 percent.

The floods first struck the western province of Baluchistan on July 22 before inundating Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab and Sindh, the country’s most populous provinces.
