Venezuelan Politicians Trade Accusations Following Murder
['Andrew Rosati Noris Soto', 'Andrew Rosati', 'Noris Soto']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-11-26/venezuelan-politicians-trade-accusations-following-murder
Venezuela’s rival political factions traded accusations on Thursday following the murder of an opposition official, ratcheting up the tension days before parliamentary elections.

Luis Manuel Diaz, a coordinator for the Democratic Action party, was gunned down at a rally in central Venezuela late Wednesday. Lilian Tintori, wife of jailed opposition leader Leopoldo Lopez, was yards away from Diaz on the stage at the time.

“They want to kill me,” Tintori told reporters at a press conference in Caracas Thursday, saying she was splashed by the victim’s blood. Blaming President Nicolas Maduro for the death, Tintori said: “We know that you gave the order.”

Violence has escalated as Venezuelans prepare to elect members of Parliament next week, with polls showing the ruling Socialist party losing control of the National Assembly for the first time in 16 years. Venezuela has the highest inflation in the world, rampant crime and shortages of most consumer staples.

The opposition has accused President Maduro of stoking violence after promising his supporters that his party would win “by any means” in recent weeks.

Henry Ramos Allup, leader of the opposition party Democratic Action, told reporters that such rhetoric gives “irresponsible activists, armed gangs and people who fear losing the next election license to commit this type of misdeed.”

Criminal Groups

The Public Prosecutor’s office announced Thursday that it commissioned two prosecutors to investigate Diaz’ death. Speaking at a campaign event in western Venezuelan, President Maduro condemned Diaz’s death and said initial reports suggested it was result of criminal groups “settling a score.”

Deflecting recent accusations, he said his political foes sought to stoke unrest ahead of the vote. The opposition “wants to fill the country with violent confrontation. They’re desperate,” he said.

The opposition party alliance has reported several assaults on its candidates during this campaign. Tintori says she was the victim of recent attacks, including an attempt to sabotage the brakes of a plane she was using on Wednesday.

The killing of the opposition leader has drawn condemnation from governments and organizations, including the U.S. State Department.

“Campaigns of fear, violence, and intimidation have no place in democracy,” State Department spokesman John Kirby said in statement.
