AmEx Profit Tops Estimates as Card Spending Climbs; Shares Rise
['Jennifer Surane']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-20/american-express-profit-beats-estimates-as-card-spending-climbs
American Express Co., the credit-card issuer grappling with the loss of retail partners, posted a first-quarter profit that beat analysts’ estimates as customers increased purchases.

The lender’s shares climbed in late trading in New York Wednesday after it reported per-share earnings of $1.45, exceeding the $1.33 average estimate of 29 analysts surveyed by Bloomberg. Net income slid 6.5 percent to $1.43 billion from $1.53 billion a year earlier, AmEx said in a statement.

Chief Executive Officer Ken Chenault has reassigned senior managers to buoy earnings and consolidate marketing operations. The firm has vowed to trim $1 billion in costs by the end of 2017, though Chenault has said quarterly results will be uneven as the company spends money to attract new customers. Revenue increased 1.6 percent to $8.09 billion, in line with the estimates, while expenses rose 4.9 percent to $5.47 billion.

“Revenues reflected strong, underlying growth in our lending portfolio, along with higher cardmember spending and fee income,” Chenault, 64, said in the statement. “Investment spending was up significantly and reflected initiatives to grow the business by expanding our cardmember base and gaining a greater share of their overall spending and borrowing.”

Shares Rise

AmEx climbed 4.1 percent to $67.67 at 4:33 p.m. in New York. The shares had slid 6.5 percent this year through the close of regular trading.

Worldwide billed business, or customer card spending, advanced 3.3 percent to $253.8 billion. The average discount rate, a measure of the fees AmEx charges merchants, fell to 2.44 percent from 2.49 percent a year earlier, the company said. Return on equity, a measure of profitability, dropped to 23.6 percent from 29 percent a year earlier, according to the statement.

Last year, American Express said it was ending its U.S. partnership with Costco Wholesale Corp., a relationship that accounted for 20 percent of AmEx’s worldwide loans and 8 percent of customer spending. AmEx may lose another valuable credit-card partner if Marriott International Inc. completes its acquisition of Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide Inc., analysts including RBC Capital Markets’ Jason Arnold have said.

EPS Targets

The company reiterated earnings-per-share targets of $5.40 to $5.70 for this year, and at least $5.60 for 2017. AmEx has long sought to boost per-share profit by 12 percent to 15 percent over the long term, while targeting revenue growth of at least 8 percent. In March, Chenault laid out potential scenarios showing AmEx can still increase per-share earnings with slower revenue growth, while stressing that he wasn’t offering those figures as a new target.

Discover Financial Services, the credit-card issuer that’s expanded to student lending and unsecured personal loans, posted first-quarter profit Tuesday that beat analysts’ estimates as total loans rose 4 percent to $70.3 billion.
