Dreams of Draghi Cash Drop Fade in Europe's Political Abyss
['Jeff Black Jeanna Smialek', 'Jeff Black', 'Jeanna Smialek']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-20/dreams-of-a-draghi-cash-drop-fade-in-europe-s-political-abyss
Should Mario Draghi ever want to start raining down helicopter money, the European Central Bank president is likely to struggle to get off the ground.

In the debate over a form of stimulus that many believe is at odds with the European Union treaty, even the option with the fewest legal hurdles risks kicking off a political battle that contributes to the euro’s demise. That view extends to economists who say such a radical step is needed to stop the currency bloc from slipping into terminal decline.

The analogy of a helicopter drop of free cash, conceived by U.S. Nobel laureate Milton Friedman, has morphed into ideas ranging from coordinating monetary and fiscal policy to handing central bank-written checks to citizens. The latter option is receiving the most attention in the euro area, where states are banned from running overdrafts at central banks or directly selling them bonds.

Strictly speaking, Article 123 of the Lisbon Treaty “does not exclude giving cash directly to people,” said Adair Turner, former chairman of the U.K. Financial Services Authority and now a senior fellow at the Institute for New Economic Thinking. “In Europe, the moment you start talking about creating money and spending you get the question: ‘Who’s going to get it?’ The fact that there is imperfect trust between those nations just magnifies the problems of agreeing to something which is technically possible and economically required.”

What Next?

As the ECB Governing Council meets in Frankfurt starting Wednesday, the debate over what could possibly come next if the current round of bond purchases and negative rates fails to save the economy from deflation may seep into the discussion. Officials haven’t hit their inflation target in more than three years and have repeatedly delayed the date by when they expect to do so.

The topic may come up at Draghi’s post-meeting press conference. Asked about helicopter money in March, he mused that it was “an interesting idea.” When that caused a stir in some circles -- Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann called the idea “absurd” -- ECB officials played down the notion.

Bank of England Governor Mark Carney joined the debate on Tuesday, telling U.K. lawmakers that it can lead to a “compounding Ponzi scheme.” His predecessor Mervyn King said in a Bloomberg Television interview on Wednesday that central banks “have bought enough time and can do little more.”

Turner says firing up the printing press seems like a good idea, as the currency union faces grave social and economic problems that need to be aggressively tackled before they break the consensus that holds it together.

Political Discord

Yet policy makers, wearied by six years of sovereign debt crisis, fell out over Greece’s bailout in 2015 and this year has seen discord over the refugee crisis and the U.K.’s referendum on its EU membership. There’s little confidence that agreement could be reached over helicopter money even if conditions deteriorate to the point that it warrants serious consideration.

Among ECB Governing Council members, consensus to approve the tool “would be very difficult to reach,” said Gregory Claeys, an economist at the Bruegel institute in Brussels, who says depositing 1,000 euros ($1,137) into consumer bank accounts “would create a big boost in spending, and this would have quite an effect on prices.”

For a start, the central bank would have to create a new instrument beyond those currently allowed in its statute. The required approval by two-thirds of its members would be a high hurdle to clear, Claeys said.

Hyperinflation Memories

The dominant concern in some quarters of Europe might be memories of hyperinflation. The printing of money by Germany’s Reichsbank in the 1920s, in part to fund reparations, destabilized the nation’s currency and helped pave the way to Nazi rule. That ultimately led to tight legal restraints on what the Bundesbank, and consequently the ECB, can and can’t do.

Some commentators think there’s a way around the letter of the law. In a paper published this month, Deutsche Bank AG economists led by George Saravelos said the ECB could bypass governments entirely and send funds directly to the public. In theory, that should raise nominal demand. In practice, it would probably draw a backlash.

“It would be such an overt fiscal action that the legitimacy of the ECB would be undermined,” said Willem Buiter, chief economist at Citigroup Inc. and an early advocate of helicopter money. “Central banks sending a check to every man woman and child would flout the principle that it’s parliaments who take these decisions. I don’t think they could politically survive it.”

‘Wrong Lessons’

The alternative -- political control of the distribution of helicopter money -- would still meet with rejection in Germany and spur the rise of the euro-skeptic right, according to Turner.

“The euro area is doomed to remain the victims of this Germanic obsession with the aftermath of the Weimar hyperinflation,” said Buiter. “They’re learning the wrong lessons from history and I don’t think that will go away.”

For one of the founders of the euro area, it’s Buiter and his like who are learning the wrong lessons. Otmar Issing, the ECB’s first chief economist and a former Bundesbank board member, said in an interview that the concept of helicopter money has been misunderstood.

Friedman’s imagery in his 1969 work “The Optimum Quantity of Money” was intended to explain how sudden changes in the money supply produce inflation without much changing the output capacity of the economy.

As a policy, Issing said it’s only conceivable in situations “when everything is in a shambles.” It bears no relevance to today’s Europe, and would only lead to irrevocable corruption of money by political expediency.

“Once you expose the money-printing machine to governments, it is done,” he said. “You can try to organize, institutionalize, limits to that and argue that an independent central bank could stop it any day -- this is an illusion.”
