Asia Stocks Gain as Japanese Shares Rally on Quake Stimulus Bets
['Jonathan Burgos']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-19/asia-stocks-gain-as-oil-rebounds-weaker-yen-boosts-japan-shares
Asian stocks climbed as oil rebounded and speculation that Japan’s central bank will boost stimulus in the wake of a deadly earthquake spurred the biggest rally for Tokyo shares in seven weeks.

The MSCI Asia Pacific Index rose 1.8 percent to 132.65 as of 4:30 p.m. in Hong Kong, heading for its highest close since Dec. 3. Japan’s Topix index jumped 3.3 percent to erase Monday’s 3 percent loss. U.S. stocks advanced, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average closing above the 18,000 level for the first time since July, as investors shook off oil’s losses on failed output talks and looked toward a bevy of corporate earnings this week. Oil rose to more than $40 a barrel in Tuesday trading.

“There appears to be less skepticism, with investors shrugging off oil’s losses overnight,” Michael McCarthy, chief market strategist at CMC Markets in Sydney, said by phone. “Pessimism in analysts expectations in the lead-up to the U.S. earnings season appears overdone. There’s room for an upward surprise.”

The Nikkei 225 Stock Average jumped 3.7 percent as the yen fell to as low as 109.22 per U.S. dollar and volatility on the gauge declined after spiking 16 percent yesterday. Investors continued weighing the economic fallout from Thursday’s earthquake in Kumamoto and subsequent aftershocks in southwestern Japan that killed 44 people and left more than 1,000 injured. The quake forced the closure of factories at companies such as Sony Corp. and Toyota Motor Corp. The region’s tourism is also suffering as Korean and Chinese tour agencies and airline carriers canceled tours and flights.

Quake Anxiety

Bank of Japan Governor Haruhiko Kuroda said on Saturday it is hard to assess the economic impact of the earthquake and that he will monitor it closely. Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said on Monday in parliament he would consider speeding up a transfer of tax revenues to local governments and using surplus budget funds in response to the quake.

Anxiety over the Kumamoto earthquake “is leading to expectations of further easing from the Bank of Japan. That stopped the yen’s gains against the dollar,” said Toshihiko Matsuno, chief strategist at SMBC Friend Securities Co. in Tokyo.

Japanese exporters advanced, with Sony and Toyota climbing at least 3.9 percent as the yen weakened. Inpex Corp. rose 2.7 percent, pacing gains among energy producers as crude oil rebounded. Rio Tinto Group advanced 3.9 percent in Sydney after the world’s second-largest mining company cut its forecast for production at its Australian mines, a move that could help bolster prices of commodities including iron ore.

Regional Gauges

South Korea’s Kospi index added 0.1 percent. Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 Index increased 1 percent. New Zealand’s S&P/NZX 50 Index rose 0.3 percent. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Index climbed 1.3 percent and Singapore’s Straits Times Index gained 1.1 percent to the highest level since November. Taiwan’s Taiex index slipped 0.4 percent.

China’s Shanghai Composite Index advanced 0.3 percent, its first gain in three days, as a rally by rare-earth producers offset falling energy shares. The gauge remains the worst performer globally this year, with a 14 percent drop. Prudence will feature more prominently in China’s monetary policy than last year, while a certain degree of looseness will be maintained, the Xinhua News Agency said in a commentary on Monday.

E-mini futures on the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index gained 0.4 percent. The U.S. equity benchmark index rose 0.7 percent on Monday to the highest close since Dec. 1 after Hasbro Inc. and Morgan Stanley reported earnings that beat analyst estimates.
