Energy Transfer-Williams Deal Had Another Sort of Tax Day
['Tim Loh']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-18/energy-transfer-surges-williams-slides-on-tax-opinion-hang-up
Monday turned out to be a different sort of Tax Day for Energy Transfer Equity LP and Williams Cos., two U.S. energy pipeline giants seeking a multibillion-dollar merger.

While Americans were filing their annual tax returns, Energy Transfer revealed in its own filing that it has yet to obtain a tax opinion needed to close its takeover of Williams. Latham & Watkins LLP told the company that, if the deal had closed Monday, the law firm wouldn’t have been able to deliver a so-called “721 opinion” -- deeming the transaction an exchange that frees shareholders from tax liabilities.

Williams disagrees with that position and the two companies are discussing how it may affect the deal’s closing, according to the filing. It’s the latest in a series of twists for the troubled pipeline merger. Since Energy Transfer offered in September $43.50 for each Williams share, the collapse in oil prices has cut the market value of both companies by roughly half, casting doubt on whether the takeover will happen.

“We view the current uncertainty over the opinion as yet another impediment to the ETE-WMB merger,” said Selman Akyol, an equity analyst at Stifel Nicolaus & Co. “The latest transaction update from ETE muddies the waters.”

The deal’s arbitrage spread, traded by those betting on whether it’ll close, widened Monday to the biggest since January, reflecting growing doubt about its prospects.

The spread is “blowing out,” Timm Schneider, an analyst at Evercore ISI, said in a note to clients. “The stocks are certainly reacting to the speculation around a potential completion (or not) of this transaction.”

Energy Transfer jumped as much as 8.4 percent in early trading on Tuesday and was at $10.50 at 9:46 a.m. in New York. Williams rose by 31 cents, or 1.9 percent, to $17.

Both companies are required to cooperate and make “commercially reasonable efforts” to obtain the tax opinions necessary for the deal, based on their merger agreement. Lance Latham, a spokesman for Williams, declined to comment on Monday’s filing. Vicki Granado, a spokeswoman for Energy Transfer, declined to comment beyond the statement.

Energy Transfer also indicated in Monday’s filing that future dividend payouts from its Energy Transfer Corp. unit, a limited partnership created for the Williams merger, may be in jeopardy.

‘Challenging’ Conditions

Owing in part to “more challenging business conditions,” Energy Transfer’s management is forecasting that Energy Transfer Corp., shares of which would be exchanged for existing ones in Williams, will issue payouts of 57 cents a share in 2016 and 46 cents in 2018 -- but nothing in 2017.

The proposed deal has already spurred disagreements between the two companies. In March, Energy Transfer completed a private unit offering that it may use to help pay down debt associated with the purchase of Williams. Williams had earlier blocked its proposal to hold a public offering and wasn’t involved in the private one.

Williams filed suit against Energy Transfer and its chief executive officer, Kelcy Warren, over the exchange earlier this month. In its challenge against Warren, Williams said its would-be leader “maliciously” orchestrated the offering to guarantee himself more than $200 million a year in payments at the expense of other investors.
