U.S. Gas Jumps by Most Since December on Warmer Weather Outlook
['Naureen Malik']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-19/u-s-natural-gas-gains-as-warm-weather-stokes-power-plant-demand-in7mf5zm
U.S. natural gas futures posted the biggest one-day gain since December as unseasonably hot weather stoked demand from electricity generators to run air conditioners.

The rally accelerated after a U.S. government weather model showed temperatures would be “a lot warmer” than previously forecast in the Midwest to the mid-Atlantic next week, according to Commodity Weather Group LLC. Overnight outlooks had shown the heat easing.

The warmth that blanketed most of the U.S. most of this past winter, which curtailed heating demand and caused prices to crash to a 17-year low, is now an unexpected boon as it spurs early cooling needs. Gas deliveries to power plants climbed 7.3 percent to 25.06 billion cubic feet on Tuesday from a week earlier, PointLogic Energy data show.

“You do have above-normal temperatures that could spark some utility demand moving forward,” said Bob Yawger, director of the futures division at Mizuho Securities USA Inc. in New York. “That’s definitely spawning the price action here. Any kind of demand is going to be good.”

Gas futures for May delivery advanced 14.8 cents, or 7.6 percent, to $2.088 per million British thermal units on the New York Mercantile Exchange, the biggest one-day gain since December 28 and the highest settlement since Feb. 9.

The midday weather update shows temperatures in the Washington and Baltimore area will be at least 80 degrees Fahrenheit (27 Celsius) on April 25 and April 26 before turning cooler later in the week, Matt Rogers, president of Commodity Weather in Bethesda, Maryland, said in an e-mail.

Gas inventories probably rose by 4 billion cubic feet last week, based the median of analyst estimates compiled by Bloomberg. Estimates ranged from a decline of five billion to a gain of 16 billion. The five-year average change for the period is an injection of 45 billion.

Stockpiles totaled 2.477 trillion cubic feet on April 8, 52.1 percent above the five-year average, U.S. Energy Information Administration data show. The EIA is scheduled to release its weekly gas storage report on April 21.
