China Faces Make-or-Break Moment, Says Forecaster of Japan Slide
['Enda Curran']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-19/china-faces-make-or-break-moment-says-forecaster-of-japan-slide
China’s decades of rapid development under tight Communist Party control may be coming to an end, according to Roy Smith, the New York University academic who as a banker in 1990 anticipated Japan’s decline.

"China has now arrived at an existential moment after nearly 40 years of extraordinary economic progress," said Smith, who also warned about budding Japan-like financial strains ahead of the Chinese stock rout in 2015. The country’s "increasingly complex and troubled economic and social system with all its scarcities" will make it tougher for Communist cadres to manage, he said.

QuickTake China's Managed Markets

While President Xi Jinping committed in 2013 to giving markets a "decisive" role in steering the economy, much of the financial system remains dominated by state-owned lenders directing credit toward the leadership’s preferred borrowers.

Restrictive social policies limiting services available to some urban residents who migrated from rural areas have seen little change as yet under Xi. Changes to rural property ownership rules have also been limited. And foreign companies are vocal in criticizing the lack of western-style rule of law in a country where the judicial system is under the Communist Party.

Authorities need to "move much further to adopt reforms that allow the country meaningfully to be shaped by market forces in the future," said Smith, who specializes in international banking and finance at NYU’s Stern School of Business. Xi "has fortified his personal power base to be able to do so, but in the end, his may be a test of whether a ‘red state’ superpower, with all its vulnerabilities, can be made to succeed and endure."

Rising debt adds to the imperative for reform, as do demands from citizens for higher-quality and more expensive health care, improved education and pensions provision. Smith continues to see parallels with Japan’s build-up of bad loans that ended up hobbling the economy.

To be sure, there are plenty of differences too. China is at a much lower stage of development compared with Japan in 1990 and, on a per-capita basis, China’s GDP in 2013 was still just half of where Japan was in 1960, according to World Bank data.

Yet overall debt has grown to almost 2.5 times the economy’s size and is showing few signs of slowing down. A fresh surge in borrowing was needed for policy makers to generate a first-quarter annual growth rate of 6.7 percent, keeping the pace within the government’s 2016 target of 6.5 percent to 7 percent.

In Japan’s case, the economy stagnated as banks became impaired by losses in the wake of a property-bubble collapse and manufacturers shifted production overseas. It’s a tale of caution for China, according to the former Goldman Sachs Group Inc. banker.

"China has followed Japan’s economic development model, and may now too be facing a financial crisis like Japan’s that it may not be able to control, and that could diminish its ability to become the next Asian superpower," said Smith.
