Takeaway.com Said to Weigh IPO With Value of More Than $1.1B
['Ruth David Elco Van Groningen Aaron Kirchfeld', 'Ruth David', 'Elco Van Groningen', 'Aaron Kirchfeld']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-14/takeaway-com-said-to-weigh-ipo-with-value-of-more-than-1-1b
Takeaway.com BV is considering an initial public offering that could value the Dutch food-delivery service at more than 1 billion euros ($1.1 billion), according to people familiar with the matter.

The business, which operates in 10 countries -- including the Netherlands, Germany, the U.K. and Vietnam -- is speaking with advisers and could list this year if markets permit, the people said, who asked not to be identified because the details aren’t public.

Takeaway.com joins similar companies, including Delivery Hero Holding GmbH, the online food delivery startup partly owned by Rocket Internet SE, in aiming for an IPO to raise money to expand. That business was valued at more than $3.1 billion in a financing round in June. The U.K.’s Just Eat Plc, which listed in 2014, announced a bundle of international acquisitions in February, expanding with food distributors in Spain, Italy, Brazil and Mexico.

A spokesman said Takeaway is always investigating the best options for the company and declined to comment further.

Takeaway, which started more than 15 years ago, raised 73 million euros in 2014 from Prime Ventures to acquire the German food delivery website Lieferando.de, according to the private equity firm’s website. Macquarie Capital also participated in that round. Prime Ventures invested 13 million euros in the company in 2012.

The company is the market leader in its home market of the Netherlands, where it takes more than a million orders a month, according to its website.

Still, the market for companies like Takeaway has proven tricky in recent months. HelloFresh AG, another food delivery company backed by Rocket, postponed plans for an IPO last year, people familiar with the matter have said. Just Eat’s shares have dropped 23 percent this year, with investors becoming increasingly skittish after its chief executive officer and chief financial officer sold shares.
