Altice Raises $4.25 Billion After 2nd Bond Sale Within Same Week
['Claire Boston']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-19/altice-said-to-tap-junk-bond-market-for-2nd-offering-this-week
Altice NV, the European cable and phone provider, returned to the U.S. junk-bond market Tuesday, raking in a total of $4.25 billion in two debt offerings in 24 hours.

The company’s Altice US Finance I unit sold $1.5 billion of bonds due in 2026 that will repay a loan of similar size maturing in 2019, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. The deal comes on the heels of a $2.75 billion debt sale from Altice Financing SA unit on Monday that was also used to repay debt.

Tuesday’s offering was the third foray into the bond market by billionaire Patrick Drahi-controlled Altice this month. French cable provider Numericable-SFR SA, which is 78 percent-owned by Altice, sold $5.19 billion worth of 10-year secured bonds earlier this month, up from an initial target of $2.25 billion. Proceeds of that deal were also used to refinance debt.

The company is taking advantage of a window that’s reopened for junk-rated borrowers to push out debt maturities, according to Spencer Godfrey, an analyst at high-yield research firm KDP Investment Advisors Inc. Yields on junk bonds have declined to as low as 8.17 percent on April 15, down from 10.17 percent in February, according to Bank of America Merrill Lynch index data.

Market Open

“For cable operators, credit markets have been pretty open,” Godfrey said.

Standard and Poor’s rated the notes BB-, or three levels below investment-grade. “The company has the ability to reduce leverage fairly quickly,” said S&P analyst Chris Mooney. “Material leverage reduction will depend on Altice’s financial policy over the next few years.”

Moody’s Investors Service graded the notes an equivalent Ba3.

The notes were issued at par to yield 5.5 percent, down from an initial offer of as much as 5.75 percent, according to a person with knowledge of the sale, who asked not to be identified because the information is private.

The $2.75 billion of 7.5 percent notes due 2026 sold Monday by Altice Financing were upsized from $2.5 billion, the company said in a release.

Drahi is expanding into the U.S. and has agreed to buy Cablevision Systems Corp. in a $17.7 billion deal to create the fourth-largest cable provider in the U.S. The takeover, which remains under U.S. regulatory review, was financed with junk bonds and leveraged loans.

Altice received regulatory approval in December for its purchase of a majority stake in Suddenlink Communications, the seventh-largest U.S. cable company.
