Rio Cuts Pilbara Ore Forecast as Auto Train System Delayed
['Rebecca Keenan David Stringer', 'Rebecca Keenan', 'David Stringer']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-18/rio-tinto-first-quarter-iron-ore-output-up-13-as-prices-soar
Rio Tinto Group, the world’s second-largest mining company, cut its forecast for production next year from its Australian mines by as much as 6 percent because of delays implementing an autonomous railway system in the remote Outback.

Production from the Pilbara region will be between 330 million metric tons and 340 million tons in 2017, down from an earlier forecast of 350 million tons, the London-based company said Tuesday in a statement. It maintained its 2016 global shipments forecast at 350 million tons.

The unexpected hold-up in fully rolling out the $518 million automated train project may bolster iron ore prices that have surged 23 percent in the first quarter as Chinese mills ramped up output to take advantage of a rebound in steel prices fueled by signs of economic recovery. Rio said testing of the driverless train network is continuing with over 75,000 kilometers (47,000 miles) of mainline trials completed.

A delay “would be a miss on expectations and a miss on structural reforms and would hit capex on the negative side as well,” Evan Lucas, a market strategist at IG Ltd. in Melbourne, said by phone. “The expectation for the full year is slightly below estimates, which is not a bad thing as it is likely to drive prices up.”

Rio rose 3.9 percent to close at A$49.29 in Sydney, the highest since Nov. 12. The stock has gained 10 percent this year. Rival BHP Billiton Ltd. rose 5.2 percent

“We continue to experience volatility in commodity prices across all markets,” Chief Executive Officer Sam Walsh, who will step down on July 1, said in the statement. “In the face of a testing external environment, our focus remains on delivering further cost and productivity improvements, disciplined capital management and maximizing free cash flow.”

Commodity prices have probably bottomed amid brighter prospects for Chinese demand, a weaker dollar and signs of tighter supplies, according to Citigroup Inc. Volatility in pricing and sentiment will extend into this quarter, followed by a “more constructive” second half of the year, the analysts wrote. They were bearish on iron ore, expecting mine output increases and probable losses in steel prices to hurt rates.

The world’s largest ore producers, including Rio and BHP, have expanded low-cost output, squeezing competitors and adding to a glut, prompting criticism from lawmakers and rivals. By 2021, shipments from Australia may be 926 million tons, the government said this month in a report.

Rio reported first-quarter iron ore production rose 13 percent from a year earlier to 84 million tons. That was in line with the 83.9 million ton median estimate among six analysts surveyed by Bloomberg. Production dropped 4 percent from the previous quarter.

Trimmed Estimates

Citigroup trimmed its estimate for Rio’s full-year iron ore output for 2017 to 335 million tons and pushed out the production profile by one year to reach 360 million tons a year by 2019, driving minor earnings downgrades, according to note Tuesday by analysts led by Clarke Wilkins.

The raw material has staged a surprise rally in 2016 on the back of three straight years of losses through 2015 after policy makers signaled they’re prepared to support growth, mills boosted purchases even as port stockpiles climbed, and steel prices advanced. Data last week showed China’s total exports jumped the most in a year, signaling that the second-biggest economy may be stabilizing.

Ore with 62 percent content delivered to Qingdao has risen 39 percent this year to $60.36 a dry ton, averaging $50, according to Metal Bulletin Ltd. Iron ore may average $45 a ton in 2016, $39 next year and $38 in 2018, according to Citigroup.

Prices “may well soften in the second half,” as new supply from mines offsets improving demand in China, Walsh told reporters last week in London, after the company’s annual shareholder meeting. Demand this year may have been “front-end loaded and will taper off,” Liberum Capital Ltd. analysts wrote in an April 13 note, forecasting prices will fall below $40 a ton before the second half.

Mined copper output declined 2 percent to 141,200 tons, Rio said in the statement. That compares with the 140,000 ton estimate among five analysts. Aluminum output rose 10 percent to 887,000 tons after a ramp-up phase was completed at the Kitimat smelter. That beat the 881,500 ton estimate among four analysts.
