When It Comes to Luxury Watches, Green Is the New Blue
['Chris Rovzar']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-20/mbf-lm1-mad-dubai-green-dials-new-trend-in-luxury-watches
For a couple of years now, blue faces have been buzzy in the world of mechanical watches. But this year at Baselworld, the leading trade show for luxury timepieces, many brands were experimenting with various shades of green dials—and to great effect.

The camo green Big Bang Unico Italia Independent from Hublot.

Notably, Hublot showcased a green camo version of its Big Bang Unico Italia Independent, part of a partnership with Fiat heir Lapo Elkann's fashion brand. (You can buy a pair of sunglasses in the same color and material, if you like.)

Shinola has long had a number of top-selling green watches, and Victorinox and MeisterSinger showed off some handsome new ones this year, too.

The Shinola Canfield Chrono in green.

But a very rich example of this new trend just came onto our radar, and this one indicates the trend is gaining traction in the communities that are still investing in luxury watches despite a global financial slump.

The newest MB&F Legacy Machine, a 13-piece special update on the out-there watch brand's marquee line, has a jewel tone green dial that is a real head-turner. It is aimed specifically at the brand's Middle East audience—it will only be sold by Ahmed Seddiqi & Sons at the MB&F M.A.D. Gallery in Dubai.

The M.A.D. Galleries are experimental sales venues that retail MB&F watches, but also a collection of other technical wonders that they call "Mechanical Art Devices," like $35,000 Swiss robots and Nixie tube clocks. (See also the Auto Fabrica motorcycles featured by us last week.) The Dubai gallery is the brand's third; it follows outposts in Geneva and Taipei.

The MB&F LM1 M.A.D. DUBAI. Source: MB&F

The green face is created using Chemical Vapor Deposition, which is akin to the Physical Vapor Deposition (PVD) you often hear about with high-end watches. (Basically, a very thin layer of coating is created with vaporized metallics that then solidify on the dial base.) And in an additional new flourish, one of the two time dials features Arabic-Hindi numerals. The case is made of grade five titanium, a first for MB&F, and the central balance wheel is fastened into place by two attractive bridges.

The LM1 M.A.D. Dubai watch will retail for around $84,000—and you'll need to go to Dubai to get it.
