Allergan Weighs Return to Deals With $34 Billion From Teva Sale
['Ketaki Gokhale Kristen Hallam', 'Ketaki Gokhale', 'Kristen Hallam']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-06/allergan-weighs-return-to-deals-with-34-billion-from-teva-sale
The end of the health-care industry’s biggest ever merger may also be the beginning of another round of deal-making for Allergan Plc.

“We will look at anything that is a growth-oriented asset,” Allergan Chief Executive Officer Brent Saunders said in a Bloomberg Television interview Wednesday, declining to specify potential targets. “That will include R&D assets and marketed products. Everything is a possibility.”

Allergan and Pfizer Inc. agreed to end their merger Wednesday, two days after officials in Washington moved to crack down on corporate inversions. Those proposed tax rules won’t affect the sale of Allergan’s generic-drug business to Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., a Teva spokesman said Wednesday. Allergan will have $34 billion in cash to spend once the sale is completed.

“You can buy a lot of biotech for that,” said Daniel Mahony, who helps manage about $12 billion including health-care funds at Polar Capital LLP in London, in an interview.

Allergan could pursue another big tie-up, such as merging with AstraZeneca Plc, the U.K. drugmaker that is selling non-core assets in order to fund development of its pipeline of cancer drugs, Mahony said. AstraZeneca rose as much as 4.5 percent, the biggest intraday gain in five months, on speculation it will become a target for either Pfizer or Allergan. An AstraZeneca spokesman declined to comment.

Standing Alone

The U.S. Treasury Department rules won’t hurt Allergan as a standalone company, Saunders said. The company’s Irish tax address, coveted by Pfizer, actually gives it an edge, he said.

“We have a competitive advantage in that these rules lock U.S. companies into being less competitive globally, whereas a Dublin-based company has more freedom,” he said.

Saunders and Chairman Paul Bisaro have engineered a series of multibillion-dollar deals to grow the company from a generic-drug maker into a global contender with $15 billion in annual sales and a range of products from wrinkle treatment Botox to Namenda for dementia.

Serial Dealmaker

Allergan, then known as Actavis Plc, moved its tax address abroad in 2013, with its $7.8 billion purchase of Warner Chilcott Plc. Actavis subsequently bought Allergan for about $65 billion and took its name, and then bought Forest Laboratories Inc. for more than $20 billion.

By shedding its generics unit, Allergan, which makes the blockbuster branded wrinkle treatment Botox, could focus on building its portfolio of branded and specialty medicines through biotech acquisitions such as its purchase of Naurex Inc., which is developing a fast-acting antidepressant.

Saunders is a serial dealmaker and “likely to lean toward M&A but wouldn’t face near term pressure to do so," said Bloomberg Intelligence analyst Elizabeth Krutoholow in an e-mail. The company could use the proceeds from the Teva sale to pay down debt as well as pursue deals, she said.

While the odds of an AstraZeneca purchase happening are remote, it’s clear that Allergan will have to do a deal of some scale, a share buy-back, or some combination of the two, Polar Capital’s Mahony said.

“Allergan will have to deploy that capital in some way,” Mahony said. “They’ll either have to do a massive buyback, which I doubt, or they’ll go and spend half of it, and do a buyback over two years.”

The transaction with Teva hasn’t closed yet, which gives Allergan time to form an acquisition strategy, Mahony said. Teva won conditional European Union approval for its takeover of the Allergan unit last month, and has said the purchase may be completed by June.
