Melrose Said to Drop Out of Race for Philips Lighting Unit
['Aaron Kirchfeld Elco Van Groningen Ruth David', 'Aaron Kirchfeld', 'Elco Van Groningen', 'Ruth David']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-03/melrose-said-to-drop-out-of-bidding-for-philips-lighting-unit
U.K. investment company Melrose Industries Plc has dropped out of the running to buy Royal Philips NV’s lighting division, increasing the likelihood of an initial public offering of the business, according to people familiar with the matter.

Melrose had concerns about the division’s business outlook and a lack of data, said the people, who asked not to be identified because talks are private. While the sales process continues, Philips and its advisers are preparing a potential listing and informally sounding out investors, the people said.

The offer deadline for the remaining bidders has been pushed back about a week to around April 18, said the people. Buyout firms Blackstone Group LP and Onex Corp., a group led by Apollo Global Management LLC as well as Chinese investor GO Scale Capital are bidding for the business, people familiar with the matter previously said. The unit could fetch about 5 billion euros ($5.7 billion), people familiar with the process had said.

Philips Chief Executive Officer Frans van Houten is selling the lighting division, which makes end products such as street lights, to focus on the company’s health-care business as demand increases for technology that allows hospitals to analyze clinical data and patients to monitor their health on smartphones.

Shares of Philips lost as much as 2.2 percent and were trading down 1.4 percent at 24.35 euros on Monday at 9:14 a.m. in Amsterdam, valuing the company at about 22.7 billion euros.

Representatives for Melrose and Philips declined to comment.

Melrose in July agreed to sell its Elster business, which makes gas, electric and water meters, for 3.3 billion pounds ($4.7 billion) to Honeywell International Inc. The British firm’s market capitalization shrank to 518 million pounds after it returned proceeds from the sale to shareholders. The company, which specializes in buying and selling engineering companies, would’ve had to raise a significant amount of equity to acquire Philips’s lighting unit.

“With equity markets remaining volatile and private equity in our view potentially suffering financing headwinds, we believe Melrose by virtue of funding a potential deal through equity remains in a strong position” to buy the Philips business, Credit Suisse Group AG analysts said in a note last month. But “we do not expect Melrose to chase a deal at any cost.”
