Publicis Revenue Exceeds Estimates on North American Growth
['Kristen Schweizer Alexandre Boksenbaum-Granier', 'Kristen Schweizer', 'Alexandre Boksenbaum-Granier']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-19/publicis-quarterly-sales-beat-estimates-on-north-american-growth
Publicis Groupe SA, whose advertising agencies work for brands including Volkswagen and Nestle, reported first-quarter sales that beat analysts’ estimates on more business from digital operations and growth in North American and European markets. The shares advanced.

Revenue in the period rose 8.9 percent to 2.29 billion euros ($2.59 billion), the Paris-based company said in a statement on Tuesday. That surpassed the 2.27 billion-euro average estimate of analysts in a Bloomberg survey. Organic growth, which strips out effects from acquisitions and currency swings -- and by which the ad industry judges its performance -- increased 2.9 percent, more than Publicis said it expected.

Publicis, whose agencies include Leo Burnett and Saatchi & Saatchi, is seeing a turnaround of business compared with last year, when revenue was hurt by clients canceling and postponing campaigns. The French company said Tuesday new account wins at the end of 2015 boosted growth in the first quarter, though effects from the loss of several media-buying accounts will be felt later this year. Publicis lost business with L’Oreal, Wal-Mart and Procter & Gamble in recent months.

Organic growth was “far ahead of consensus expectations,” analysts at Liberum said in a note to clients. Still, “second quarter and third quarter could see a drag as first quarter was so much better than expected."

Publicis shares rose 5 percent to 65.35 euros at 10:02 a.m in Paris. They had advanced 1.4 percent this year through Monday.

“The second and third quarters are the period during which we will take the impact of budgets that have been lost with full force,” Chief Executive Officer Maurice Levy told reporters, adding that while organic growth then will be lower than in the first three months, he doesn’t predict an actual decrease in sales. “The fourth quarter should be much better.”

Sales in North America rose by 13 percent to 1.3 billion euros, followed by Europe with an increase of 7.3 percent to 631 million euros. Business in Asian Pacific markets rose 4.1 percent to 230 million euros.

Publicis said in December revenue will grow 2 percentage points above the industry average each year from 2016, with digital operations rising to 60 percent of sales in 2018. It predicted its operating margin will rise to 17.3 percent to 19.3 percent of sales in 2018, compared with 15.3 percent in 2012.

Levy, who has been CEO for more than 30 years, is planning to step down from the role next year. The Frenchman led Publicis into the digital age, as advertising shifted from spreads in newspapers and magazines to digital pop-ups and banner ads on the Web. Levy has overseen acquisitions of Internet advertising firms such as Sapient, Digitas, LBi International and Razorfish, and pushed the company to new business in emerging markets.
