Record High No Stop to Russian Stocks on Earnings Optimism
['Ksenia Galouchko', 'Maria Levitov']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-19/record-high-no-stop-to-russian-stocks-as-profit-outlook-perks-up
A turnaround in the earnings prospects of Russian companies is putting a two-year equity rally on a firmer foundation.

Analysts have boosted profit projections for members of Russia’s 50-stock Micex Index by about 5 percent this year as rebounding oil raises the likelihood the country will emerge from a recession more quickly. The benchmark is trading 1 percent away from a record high after money managers from HSBC Holdings Plc to Credit Suisse Group AG turned bullish on Russian stocks, the cheapest in emerging markets relative to future earnings forecasts.

“We expect to see earnings upgrades,” said Anna Vaananen, a Zurich-based money manager from Credit Suisse Asset Management, who’s added stocks including Internet search engine Yandex NV and transport services company Globaltrans Investment Plc to her $60 million portfolio since January. “Undervalued equities are like having money in the pocket."

Even after talks aimed at an output freeze failed in Doha over the weekend, crude is trading more than 50 percent above its 12-year low in January. That’s helped the ruble recover and boosted companies beyond the oil industry like Sberbank PJSC, the nation’s biggest lender, and M.video, Russia’s largest consumer electronics retailer. While crude provides the main tailwind for the world’s biggest energy exporter, any move by the U.S. or European Union to ease or lift sanctions would unleash a rally that transforms Russia’s stocks into the “bargain of the century,” Mark Mobius, executive chairman at Templeton Emerging Markets Group, said this month.

Analysts have boosted their projections for profit at Micex-listed firms in the next 12 months to a record 281 rubles ($4.28) per share as of April 13, data compiled by Bloomberg show. In the same period last year, they cut their estimates by 9.9 percent.

After a rally of 11 percent in 2016, the nation’s equities are still among the cheapest in the world. At 7 times projected 12-month earnings, the average valuation of the Micex’s 50 members is 41 percent less than that of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index.

For Jack Arnoff, a partner at Elbrus Capital Partners in London, those prices are hard to resist. The economy may be in a second year of recession, but the U.S. and EU penalties haven’t brought the kind of meltdown analysts were predicting in 2014, while the ruble has climbed back from twin oil-price shocks in the past two years, he said.

“We have to recognize now that the worst expectations for Russia’s political and economic system didn’t materialize and the chances of those materializing are now nil,” said Arnoff, whose fund has bought local Russian stocks over the past month. “The Russian market has potential to go higher from current levels.”

The Micex renewed its assault on a 2007 high on Wednesday, climbing 1.3 percent to 1,955 by 4:30 p.m. in Moscow. The ruble weakened less than 0.1 percent to 65.8840 after touching its strongest level in almost five months on Tuesday. Brent crude traded above $43 a barrel after losing 2.2 percent.

Fresh impetus for the gains may come this summer, when the U.S. and EU review their penalties imposed after Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014.

“I cannot go overweight while the sanctions are in place,” Heinz Ruettimann, an analyst at Julius Baer, said by phone from Zurich. “That’s the real trigger for the Russian economy, for the equity market to become more positive about the economic situation."

Even without movement on the restrictions, Vitaly Isakov, a money manager at Otkritie Asset Management in Moscow said he’s seeing “large inflows” into the Russian market.

“For major foreign funds, Gazprom and Sberbank are the key stocks via which they can quickly increase their exposure to Russia,” he said by e-mail, referring to Russia’s natural-gas export monopoly, Gazprom PJSC, which has the biggest weighting in the Micex Index at 16 percent.

Sberbank holds about half of all deposits in the country, and the ruble’s 12 percent appreciation has encouraged people to keep their savings in the local currency, the lender’s main source of funding. Sberbank posted a quadrupling of profit under Russian accounting standards in the first quarter and its stock added 0.6 percent on Wednesday after jumping 2.8 percent to a record close Tuesday.

While consumer spending has yet to quicken, a letup in inflation and a stabilizing exchange rate are buoying the appeal of stocks like M.video, which climbed to the strongest level in more than two years on Tuesday. The company’s earnings rose by almost a fifth in the first quarter.

“I’m going to stay overweight for the time being,” said Hertta Alava, the head of emerging markets at FIM Asset Management Ltd. in Helsinki, who increased her positions in Russia in January, betting that either crude will rise or sanctions will be loosened. “It was the oil price that has turned the market and the ruble.”
