These Are the Highest-Paying Companies in the U.S.
['Julie Verhage']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-20/these-are-the-highest-paying-companies-in-the-u-s
Making six figures a year is still a lot easier if you work at a technology or consulting company than it is in many other industries.

In a new report from career website Glassdoor Inc., technology and consulting firms took 24 of the 25 spots on its list of highest-paying companies in America. The only company on the list that’s not in tech or consulting is Visa, at No. 11. Last year these two fields took 13 out of 15 spots, with law firms grabbing the remaining two.

“This report reinforces that high pay continues to be tied to in-demand skills and higher education,” Andrew Chamberlain, chief economist at Glassdoor, said in the report. He added that a “war for talent” is pushing up salaries in tech and consulting.

Even companies that are struggling in the stock market continue to pay well. Despite poor performance after issuing initial public offerings, a number of former highflying startups employ some of the highest-paid workers in the U.S. And companies such as Box Inc., Twitter Inc., and LinkedIn Corp. pay their employees quite well regardless of stock slumps. Uber Technologies Inc., Airbnb Inc., and Pinterest Inc. may not have made Glassdoor’s top 25 this year, but median compensation still cracks the six-figure mark for all three businesses.

Here’s the full list from Glassdoor, including each company’s median total compensation:

While pay isn’t everything when it comes to workplace satisfaction, it certainly has an impact. Facebook Inc., LinkedIn, Boston Consulting Group Inc., and Alphabet Inc. all ranked highly on Glassdoor’s most recent list of best places to work. “Even if I was offered 150 percent of salary somewhere else, I would turn it down,” one LinkedIn employee wrote on Glassdoor’s website. “At LinkedIn I have had the unique opportunity to work with people that are incredibly smart, hard working, and know how to have fun while getting their work done!”

To be considered for this report, companies had to have at least 50 salary submissions from employees between March 2015 and March 2016.
