Asian Stocks Fall as Materials Drop on China Tightening Concern
['Anna Kitanaka', 'Shani Raja']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2010-10-07/japanese-stock-futures-australian-shares-decline-on-currency-commodities
Asian stocks fell, with a key regional index falling the most since August, as commodity companies declined after reports that China acted to rein in bank lending in order to cool its economy.

BHP Billiton Ltd., the world’s largest mining company, lost 1.7 percent in Sydney as crude and metal prices declined. Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd. fell 0.8 percent in Hong Kong amid reports the nation’s central bank raised some lenders’ reserve requirements. Toyota Motor Corp., the world’s largest carmaker, lost 1.5 percent in Tokyo as the strong yen dimmed the outlook for export earnings. China’s Shanghai Composite Index increased for a third day as the country’s shares caught up with regional measures after a weeklong holiday from Oct. 1 to Oct. 7.

The MSCI Asia Pacific Index fell 1.5 percent, the most since Aug. 25, to 128.44 as of 7:33 p.m. in Tokyo, with more than four shares dropping for each that advanced.

“The concern is that China’s tightening monetary policy at a time when people are already a bit more anxious about the pace of growth in other parts of the world,” said Stephen Halmarick, who helps manage about $135 billion as head of investment markets research at Colonial First State Global Asset Management in Sydney.

Shanghai Catches Up

All 10 industry groups in the Asia Pacific gauge declined. The gauge rose for its sixth consecutive week last week as speculation grew that the U.S. Federal Reserve will join Japan in implementing measures to protect the economic recovery.

Japan’s Nikkei 225 Stock Average lost 2.1 percent after markets were shut for a public holiday yesterday. South Korea’s Kospi index slipped 1.2 percent. Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 Index fell 1.7 percent as mining companies slumped. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Index declined 0.4 percent.

China’s Shanghai Composite Index rose 1.2 percent as energy and metal producers surged for a third day. Yanzhou Coal Mining Co. and Jiangxi Copper Co. both advanced at or near their upper limit of 10 percent on each of the last three trading days. The MSCI Asia Pacific Materials Index tracking commodity producers rose 4.5 percent during the week that China’s market was closed for a holiday.

Futures on the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index dropped 0.6 percent. In New York yesterday, the index rose less than 0.1 percent to 1,165.32 as trading volume sank to the lowest level of the year amid growing speculation that the Federal Reserve will pump more cash into the economy to protect the recovery after payrolls declined more than expected.

Oil, Metals Decline

“Until we see investors get more confident with the U.S. economic recovery, we’ll see more investors sitting on the sidelines,” Charles Holmes, head of equities at New York-based Oppenheimer & Co. said in an interview on Bloomberg Television’s “First Up” with Susan Li.

Material companies slid the most among the MSCI Asia Pacific Index’s 10 industry groups after crude oil futures fell for a second day today and copper prices declined on the prospect of further credit tightening in China.

BHP fell 1.7 percent to A$40.74 and was the biggest single-drag on the MSCI Asia Pacific Index. Rio Tinto Group, the world’s third-largest mining companies, declined 2.8 percent to A$77.87. In Hong Kong, Cnooc Ltd., China’s leading offshore oil producer, dropped 3.7 percent to HK$16.18. Cnooc was also cut to “neutral” from “overweight” by HSBC Holdings Plc.

China Banks

Crude oil for November delivery slipped 0.8 percent to $81.34 a barrel today, extending yesterday’s 1.1 percent decline. January-delivery copper on the Shanghai Futures Exchange lost as much as 1.4 percent to 62,120 yuan a ton. The London Metal Exchange index of prices for six industrial metals including copper and aluminum fell 0.2 percent yesterday.

Industrial & Commercial Bank, China’s biggest lender, fell 0.8 percent to HK$5.93 in Hong Kong. In Shanghai, China Merchants Bank Co. lost 0.4 percent to 13.84 yuan and China Minsheng Banking Corp., the country’s first privately-owned bank, declined 0.6 percent to 5.30 yuan.

China’s central bank temporarily raised reserve requirements for six lenders, three people with knowledge of the matter said.

The reserve ratio requirement will increase by half a percentage point for two months for Industrial & Commercial Bank, China Construction Bank Corp., Bank of China, Agricultural Bank of China Ltd., China Merchants Bank Co. and China Minsheng, the people said, declining to be identified because no public announcement has been made.

Yen Strength

A gauge of consumer discretionary shares in the Asia Pacific Index lost 1.5 percent today. The consumer measure, which counts Toyota and Honda as its heaviest-weighted members, was the fourth-biggest contributor to the MSCI Asia Pacific Index’s decline.

Toyota, which receives 30 percent of its sales from North America, lost 1.5 percent to 2,851 yen. Honda Motor Co., Japan’s No. 2 carmaker, declined 2 percent to 2,930 yen. Mazda Motor Corp., which counts North America as its largest market outside Japan, dropped 5 percent to 208 yen.

The yen rose to as much as 81.39 per dollar yesterday, the strongest since April 1995. The dollar traded at 82.83 yen at the close of Tokyo trading today, compared with 82.37 at the close of stock trading in Tokyo on Oct. 8. A stronger yen hurts the value of overseas income at Japanese exporters when repatriated.

“People are anxious because the strong yen clouds the earnings outlook of Japanese companies,” said Yoji Takeda, who helps manage about $1.1 billion as the head of Asian equities at RBC Investment (Asia) Ltd. in Hong Kong.

Other stocks that fell today include Fast Retailing Co., Asia’s biggest clothing chain operator, after forecasting a 17 percent drop in full-year profit on slowing sales of its Uniqlo brand. The shares tumbled 9.8 percent to 11,180 yen, the most since April 5. The company posted the steepest decline on the MSCI Asia Pacific Index’s gauge of nearly 1,000 companies.
