Emerging-Market Stocks Extend Rally on China's Export Rebound
['Maria Levitov Matthew Kalman', 'Maria Levitov', 'Matthew Kalman']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-13/rebounding-chinese-exports-sweeten-emerging-market-asset-rally
Emerging-market equities erased losses for April, rising to a five-month high as better-than-estimated trade data signaled that China’s economy may avoid a hard landing, increasing demand for riskier assets.

Brazilian stocks rallied to a 10-month high on growing speculation that the president will be impeached, clearing the way for a new leader who will be better able to pull the country out of a recession. South African equities rose for a fourth day. India’s benchmark gauge jumped to the highest since January as inflation eased and the weather department predicted above-normal monsoon rains. The premium investors demand to own developing-nation sovereign debt over U.S. Treasuries narrowed for a fourth day.

Data that showed Chinese exports advanced for the first time since June and the decline in imports narrowed to the slowest pace this year pointed to a stabilization in the world’s second-largest economy. It helped boost emerging-market assets that had already been benefiting from a reaffirmation of the Federal Reserve’s accommodative stance and a rebound in commodities. Brent crude has increased more than 60 percent since late January.

“The stimulus is working” in China, said Hertta Alava, the head of emerging markets at FIM Asset Management Ltd. in Helsinki, who favors stocks in Russia and the U.A.E. and has been adding to her Hong Kong exposure. “There is certainly some acceleration of growth right now. China has also started to import more commodities, taking advantage of low prices. This is boosting sentiment and commodity prices.”

The MSCI Emerging Markets Index rose 1.6 percent to 844.15, the highest since Nov. 6. The gauge has gained 5.3 percent in the past five days, pushing its increase in April to 0.9 percent. All 10 industry groups advanced Wednesday, led by energy and consumer discretionary stocks. The benchmark index’s historical 50-day volatility fell to a three-month low.

China COSCO Holdings Ltd. jumped 7.6 percent in Hong Kong to a three-month high, leading a rally in shipping stocks, after China said exports increased 11.5 percent year-on-year in dollar terms March, compared with a 25.4 percent decline in February. The Hang Seng China Enterprises Index of mainland companies trading in Hong Kong rose 4 percent, narrowing its valuation gap with Shanghai-traded shares to the lowest since November.

The Ibovespa rallied 2.2 percent in Sao Paulo. Investors’ attention turned to Vice President Michel Temer, who is drawing up plans to form a transitional government as impeachment proceedings against President Dilma Rousseff gain pace. She lost more allies as Brazil’s fourth-biggest political party and a smaller party decided to abandon the ruling coalition.

India Inflation

The FTSE/JSE Africa All Share Index in Johannesburg advanced 1.7 percent. Investors have cut their short positions in the largest ETF focused on the country to the lowest level since 2010, data from Markit Ltd. show. That accompanied a surge in net capital inflows into 41 ETFs buying stocks in South Africa to a five-year high of $136 million in the first quarter, the data show.

The S&P BSE Sensex Index in Mumbai climbed 1.9 percent to the highest since Jan. 1. Consumer prices rose 4.83 percent in March from a year earlier, versus the 5 percent forecast of analysts surveyed by Bloomberg. The data followed the weather department’s assessment that the monsoon may be above normal this year.

Turkey’s Borsa Istanbul 100 Index added 2.4 percent to the highest level in 11 months. Russian stocks rallied, pushing the Micex Index to the highest since May 2008.

‘Generally Constructive’

“The bottom line is that markets are generally constructive given the dovish stance of developed-market central banks,” Simon Quijano-Evans, the London-based chief emerging-market strategist at Commerzbank AG, said . “Anything that comes on top of that, such as short-term constructive Chinese data or higher oil prices, provides the extra boost.”

The MSCI Emerging Markets Currency Index was little changed, after four days of gains. The measure has rallied 5.4 percent since the end of January and is trading near the highest level since early August.

Russia’s ruble fell 0.9 percent against the dollar. Turkey’s lira weakened 0.4 percent. South Africa’s rand jumped 1.2 percent.

The risk-on environment led to a decline in Chinese sovereign bonds, pushing the 10-year yield up three basis points to 2.94 percent. The rate on five-year Russian bonds rose one basis point to 9.32 percent.

The premium for emerging-market sovereign bonds over U.S. Treasuries narrowed two basis points to 399 basis points, according to JPMorgan Chase & Co. indexes.
