Energy Shares Lead U.S. Stocks Lower as Crude Oil Extends Drop
['Joseph Ciolli']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-12-07/u-s-index-futures-advance-after-week-of-data-clears-way-for-fed
U.S. stocks retreated as tumbling oil prices weighed on energy and raw-material companies, sparking a selloff after equities posted their biggest one-day gain in three months.

Chevron Corp. and Exxon Mobil Corp. fell more than 2.6 percent as energy producers in the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index slumped for a fourth day. Keurig Green Mountain Inc. surged 72 percent after agreeing to be acquired by a JAB Holding Co.-led investor group for about $13.9 billion in cash. Airlines rallied for a second session amid crude’s drop.

The S&P 500 fell 0.7 percent to 2,077.07 at 4 p.m. in New York, trimming an earlier drop of as much as 1.2 percent, after jumping 2.1 percent on Friday. The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 117.12 points, or 0.7 percent, to 17,730.51. The Nasdaq Composite Index declined 0.8 percent. About 7.4 billion shares traded hands on U.S. exchanges, 4.8 percent above the three-month average.

“Equity markets have basically treaded water this year as economic data has been fairly weak, particularly as it relates to the global scene,” said Kevin Caron, a market strategist and portfolio manager who helps oversee $170 billion at Stifel Nicolaus & Co. in Florham Park, New Jersey. “As we come into this period of time where the Fed is going to begin raising interest rates, we continue to be confronted with slow global growth, which is going to continue to be a challenge.”

Crude prices extended losses after falling 2.7 percent Friday amid speculation a record global glut will be prolonged as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries effectively abandoned its long-time strategy of limiting production to control prices. West Texas Intermediate futures fell 5.8 percent Monday to $37.65 a barrel, the lowest close since February 2009.

Oil’s plunge of more than 40 percent in the past year has hampered recoveries in the U.S. and Europe as capital spending has waned and inflation has remained below central-bank targets.

U.S. stocks are coming off their most volatile week since the summer as investors were faced with releases from the Labor Department, the European Central Bank and speeches by Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen. The S&P 500’s rally on Friday left it little changed for a second straight week after a report showed U.S. employers added more jobs than forecast in November, increasing speculation that the economy is strong enough to withstand higher borrowing costs -- something that Yellen has signaled.

Rate Bets

Traders are pricing in a 78 percent chance of liftoff before the Fed’s interest-rate decision on Dec. 16. Investors will have little data this week to assess the strength of the economy. Reports on retail sales, a measure of producer prices and the University of Michigan’s preliminary consumer sentiment index are due, though not until the end of the week.

“Weak oil is the story today,” said Stephen Carl, principal and head equity trader at Williams Capital Group LP. “The lack of economic numbers today is compounding the effect of energy losses. The Fed rate hike is imminent, and people are trying to square up heading into year-end.”

The selloff in equities today extended a stretch of whipsaw trading to a fifth day. The main U.S. equity index moved at least 1 percent in the previous four days, the longest stretch since August, kicking off what is usually the second-best month of the year. The S&P 500 has not had back-to-back gains in more than a month.

The Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index rose 7 percent Monday to 15.84, after its steepest drop in more than two years Friday. The measure of market turbulence known as the VIX has declined for three consecutive weeks and four of the past five.

Commodity Shares

Seven of the S&P 500’s 10 main industries dropped, with energy losing 3.7 percent, the most in more than three months. Raw-materials shares were down 1.8 percent, their largest slide in three weeks. Phone companies, utilities and consumer staples advanced.

Consol Energy Inc. and Williams Cos. lost more than 13 percent to lead the drop in energy, with Williams down the most in seven years. ConocoPhillips and Schlumberger Ltd. lost at least 2.5 percent. The energy group rallied 22 percent from an almost four-year low in August to a three-month high on Nov. 3. Since then, the sector is down 13 percent.

Copper miner Freeport-McMoRan Inc. sank 7.9 percent, the biggest drop in more than two months, to lead the slide among raw-materials. Dow Chemical Co. and Nucor Corp. fell more than 1.9 percent. U.S. Steel Corp. decreased 8.8 percent to a 24-year low, as iron ore sank on rising low-cost supply from the world’s top miners and weakening demand in China. Mining-equipment makers Joy Global Inc. and Caterpillar Inc. declined more than 2.3 percent, with Joy at its lowest since 2004.

Financial companies in the S&P 500 slipped 0.9 percent. Comerica Inc. was the sector’s biggest decliner, falling 4.4 percent, while Zions Bancorporation and Regions Financial Corp. lost more than 2.2 percent. Meanwhile, the 10-year U.S. Treasury note’s yield decreased 1.6 percent, extending its two-day decline to 3.4 percent. The KBW Bank Index dropped 1.3 percent.

Airlines Climb

Staples Inc. lost 14 percent, its biggest decline since March 2014, to lead consumer discretionary companies in the benchmark lower. The retailer will face a challenge by U.S. antitrust officials, who said for the second time in 20 years that the office supply chain’s proposed takeover of Office Depot Inc. will squelch competition and should be blocked. Office Depot plunged 16 percent.

Chipotle Mexican Grill Inc. fell 1.7 percent, and earlier as much as 8.2 percent after rescinding its 2016 forecast in the wake of an E. coli outbreak. Among other consumer shares, Netflix Inc. and Macy’s Inc. declined more than 1.9 percent.

Airlines rallied for a second day amid speculation that the drop in crude will help boost profitability. A Bloomberg index of U.S. airlines added 2.2 percent after a 3.9 percent climb Friday. JetBlue Airways Corp., Delta Air Lines Inc. and United Continental Holdings Inc. advanced more than 2.6 percent.

Food retailers were also one of the market’s few bright spots Monday. Whole Foods Market Inc. gained 4 percent, the most in two months. Kroger Co. rose 2.2 percent to a record for a third straight day, while Wal-Mart Stores Inc. climbed 1.4 percent to lead the Dow.

Gunmaker Smith & Wesson Holding Corp. surged 7.6 percent to its highest level since October 2007, amid speculation that gun enthusiasts will purchase more pistols and rifles as calls for restrictions increase. The company is scheduled to report quarterly results on Tuesday.
