German Stocks Decline as U.K. Economy Shrinks; Banks Retreat
['Adam Haigh']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-01-25/german-stocks-climb-after-siemens-earnings-beat-estimates
German stocks dropped for the first time in three days as Britain’s economy unexpectedly shrank in the fourth quarter, with banks falling also because plans to strengthen Spanish lenders failed to ease concerns about the region’s sovereign-debt crisis.

Deutsche Bank AG and Commerzbank AG fell, while Lanxess AG, Germany’s biggest publicly traded specialty chemicals producer, slid 3.4 percent as the company said Chief Financial Officer Matthias Zachert has expressed a wish to leave.

The benchmark DAX lost 0.1 percent to 7,059.01 at the close in Frankfurt. The broader HDAX Index also retreated 0.1 percent.

In London, the Office for National Statistics said the U.K.’s gross domestic product fell 0.5 percent in the three months through December after rising 0.7 percent in the previous quarter. Economists had forecast a 0.5 percent gain, based on the median of 33 predictions in a Bloomberg news survey.

Spanish Finance Minister Elena Salgado, speaking at a news conference in Madrid late yesterday, said the country’s lenders require no more than 20 billion euros ($27.2 billion) of extra capital, “all or part” of which they will be able to raise in financial markets.

The Spanish government will make the banks adopt a core capital ratio, a measure of financial strength, of at least 8 percent, Salgado said. Lenders will have until the autumn to raise enough capital to meet the rules. Those that fail to comply can tap the state’s bank-rescue fund, known as FROB, in return for ceding voting shares to the state.

Lingering Concerns

“The headlines have been bereft of news on the European debt crisis, but concerns still linger as the situation remains unresolved,” said Angus Campbell, the head of sales at Capital Spreads in London. The British report “makes the prospect of a double dip recession for the U.K. economy a reality and serious concern.”

Deutsche Bank lost 1.6 percent to 43.64 euros, while Commerzbank declined 2.7 percent to 5.62 euros.

Lanxess slid 3.4 percent to 51.29 euros. The company said Zachert has expressed a wish to take up a position elsewhere, and Merck KGaA said he will join the drugmaker as CFO and a member of the executive board.

Bayerische Motoren Werke AG, Daimler AG and Adidas AG led a rally among consumer and discretionary shares after GfK AG’s prediction that its gauge of German consumer confidence will climb next month after unemployment fell, boosting households’ willingness to spend. The Nuremberg-based market research company said today that its consumer sentiment index, based on a survey of about 2,000 people, will increase to 5.7 in February from a revised 5.5 in January. That would be the highest since October 2007.

Daimler

BMW rallied 1.5 percent to 56.08 euros, while Daimler ended a four-day slump, rising 1.3 percent to 55.21 euros. Adidas, the world’s second-largest sporting-goods maker, gained 0.7 percent to 45.52 euros.

Sky Deutschland AG gained 1.5 percent to 2.78 euros after News Corp.’s James Murdoch said his company has made money on the German pay-TV broadcaster. Murdoch said today that “as of yesterday we’ve actually made money” on Sky Deutschland.
