Morton’s Takeover Seen Burned in Restaurant LBO Deals: Real M&A
['Rita Nazareth', 'Leslie Patton']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-03-21/mortons-takeover-seen-burned-in-restaurant-lbo-deals-real-ma
For Morton’s Restaurant Group Inc. to recoup all the money shareholders have lost since it went public five years ago, the steakhouse chain needs to persuade potential private-equity buyers to splurge more than ever.

Morton’s, whose flagship restaurant in Chicago charges $55 for a Porterhouse steak, said last week that it’s exploring a possible sale to boost shareholder value as a 58 percent slump since its initial public offering in February 2006 left its market capitalization at just $121 million. The company would now need to attract a per-share bid of $17, or a 157 percent premium to its 20-day trading average through last week, to restore the losses suffered by investors who purchased stock in the IPO, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.

The price tag would exceed every leveraged buyout in the restaurant industry and surpass the record 70 percent premium Castle Harlan Inc. itself paid to take Morton’s private in 2002, the data show. The steakhouse chain, whose restaurant in midtown Manhattan is only blocks from JPMorgan Chase & Co. and Morgan Stanley, hasn’t had more than three straight years of profit in at least two decades. Now, surging food prices are eroding margins after the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression prompted Wall Street to pare back expense accounts.

“It’s not like somebody needs to pay a hundred bucks for a steak dinner,” said Matt McCormick, a Cincinnati-based money manager at Bahl & Gaynor Inc., which oversees $3.2 billion. “They had no control of their costs and the biggest customers that they target were drastically impacted by the recession. I don’t think the case for them is going to get any better.”

Strategic Alternatives

Roger Drake, a spokesman for Chicago-based Morton’s, and Michael Millican, a spokesman for Castle Harlan of New York, declined to comment beyond Morton’s statement on March 16.

Morton’s advanced 1 cent, or 0.1 percent, to $7.16 as of 11:59 a.m. today on the New York Stock Exchange.

In 2006, Morton’s IPO gave the steakhouse chain a market capitalization of about $274 million, according to a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and data compiled by Bloomberg. Castle Harlan, the private-equity firm that held at least two-thirds of Morton’s, sold at least 2.09 million shares in the offering, the filing said.

Morton’s shares since then have tumbled four times more than the 14 percent decline for the Standard & Poor’s SmallCap 600 Consumer Discretionary Index. The S&P 500, the benchmark gauge for American equity, rose 1.1 percent in the same period.

The slump hasn’t made Morton’s cheap. The steakhouse operator trades at 24.7 times earnings, the highest level relative to the S&P SmallCap 600 Consumer Discretionary Index since October 2007. The gauge is valued at 22.5 times the profit of its 108 companies, weekly data compiled by Bloomberg show.

Beef Prices

Morton’s, along with other restaurant operators, has faced surging meat prices over the past year. Beef costs, which represented 43 percent of Morton’s food and beverage expenses last fiscal year, are expected to rise more than 10 percent, Chief Financial Officer Ronald DiNella said during a conference call on Feb. 24.

The steakhouse increased its menu prices in December and January to help offset surging meat prices. The average per-person check has climbed 14 percent over the past five years to $99.19 in 2010, according to company filings.

Morton’s, which opened its first restaurant in 1978, closed at $7.15 a share last week. The company hired New York-based Jefferies & Co. as a financial adviser, and has the support of Castle Harlan and Laurel Crown Partners LLC, its private-equity investors, according to its statement.

“It probably has a higher probability being sold to a financial sponsor,” said Matthew DiFrisco, an analyst who rates Morton’s “market perform” at Oppenheimer & Co. in New York.

Relative Value

An offer of $17 a share, matching Morton’s IPO price five years ago, would be more than double the average price of $6.61 in the 20 trading days through last week and value the equity at $288 million. The takeover premium in restaurant LBOs valued at $100 million to $1 billion, including net debt, has been 27 percent on average, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.

The biggest premium on record was paid by Castle Harlan, when it took Morton’s private for about $71 million in 2002 after a bidding contest with billionaire Carl Icahn.

Including net debt, an LBO of Morton’s would also be costlier. The steakhouse chain’s enterprise value, or the sum of its stock and debt minus cash, would equal $353 million at $17 a share, or about 15.3 times its earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of $23.1 million last year, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. That would be 90 percent higher than the median restaurant LBO and more expensive than all but two acquisitions in the industry, the data show.

LBO Redux?

Over the past three decades, Morton’s has grown to almost 80 restaurants in the U.S., Puerto Rico and internationally. It added a location in Shanghai last year.

The original Morton’s in downtown Chicago is blocks from competitors Gibsons Bar & Steakhouse and Tavern on Rush. The dining spot organizes winemaker dinners for $150 a person and brings in football and baseball stars to serve four-course meals during celebrity dining events.

Morton’s rebounding sales may help lure potential buyers. The company’s revenue will climb 6.5 percent to $342 million in 2012, according to analysts’ estimates compiled by Bloomberg.

“It appears that things are getting better,” said Rob Plaza, an analyst at the private-banking unit of KeyCorp in Cleveland, which oversees $25 billion. “The business dining experience disappearing really hurt them. I’d say that chances are it would be a private-equity takeover.”

Wall Street Clientele

Sales reached a record $353.8 million in 2007, before a freeze in credit markets spurred the longest recession since the Great Depression and the collapse of New York-based Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. and Bear Stearns Cos., the fourth- and fifth-largest U.S. investment banks.

Merrill Lynch & Co., the third-largest U.S. securities firm at the time, was rescued by Charlotte, North Carolina-based Bank of America Corp. after Lehman filed the biggest bankruptcy in history in September 2008.

“The genesis of many M&A deals was hatched over drinks and steaks,” said Bahl & Gaynor’s McCormick. “Morton’s was one of the places where people would go out and try to put buyers and sellers together.”

There were 25,704 mergers and acquisitions announced globally last year, totaling $2.2 trillion, down from $4 trillion in 2007, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. So far in 2011, there were 4,918 deals totaling $472.6 billion through last week, a 10 percent increase from the $429.8 billion at the same point last year, the data show.

New York Offices

Barclays Plc of London, which took over Lehman’s brokerage business, and Bank of America, along with New York-based firms Morgan Stanley and JPMorgan, which bought Bear, have offices within blocks of Morton’s midtown location.

“They hosted a lot of closing dinners for IPOs and offerings, so for sure they were affected” by the troubles on Wall Street, said Bryan Elliott, an analyst who rates Morton’s “market perform” at St. Petersburg, Florida-based Raymond James & Associates Inc. “We all have to eat but it’s a luxury and an indulgence to go spend $100 to eat a meal.”

Elsewhere in mergers and acquisitions, AT&T Inc. agreed to buy T-Mobile USA from Bonn-based Deutsche Telekom AG in a cash-and-stock transaction currently valued at approximately $39 billion, a combination that would create America’s largest mobile-phone company.

The purchase price will include $25 billion in cash and the balance in AT&T stock, subject to adjustment, according to a statement yesterday. The deal may give Deutsche Telekom an 8 percent stake in the Dallas-based carrier.
