Stocks Gain After Jobs as Emerging Markets Surge, Bonds Retreat
['Inyoung Hwang Lu Wang', 'Inyoung Hwang', 'Lu Wang']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-03/asia-index-futures-rise-before-payrolls-with-gold-in-bull-market
U.S. stocks rose as Treasuries fell, as investors weighed a surge in hiring that came with negative wage growth, clouding the path of monetary policy. Emerging-market equities posted their best week since December 2011.

Gains by technology and financial shares offset health-care companies as the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index had a third straight weekly advance. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note climbed to the highest level in a month, as better-than-expected job growth bolstered bets the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates this year. A gauge of emerging-market currencies erased losses for the year, with Brazil’s real jumping after news the federal police raided the house of former President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, fueling speculation a change in government is imminent.

The jobs report adds to a string of data showing that the U.S. economy continues to strengthen, though at a pace not strong enough to force the Fed to raise interest rates at its policy meeting in March. Global equities have recouped more than half of this year’s losses since sinking to a 2 1/2-year low on Feb. 11, as speculation central banks from Asia to Europe stand ready to boost stimulus. China may announce its plans to revive growth at this weekend’s annual meeting of the National People’s Congress.

“The actual job gains are better than expected, which is good for those who are looking to the economy to continue to elicit positive activity,” Mark Luschini, chief investment strategist in Philadelphia at Janney Montgomery Scott LLC, said by phone. “At the same time, the backup in wage gains suggests that while the labor market improved, it’s far from being tight as to warrant wage inflation, which would draw the Fed from the sidelines.”

Equities

The S&P 500 added 0.3 percent to 1,999.99 at 4 p.m. in New York, after the benchmark surpassed 2,000 during the day, a level it has failed to close above since the start of the year. The index has rallied 9.3 percent from a 22-month low on Feb. 11 and is now lower by 2.2 percent for the year. The Dow Jones Industrial Average also advanced to surpass 17,000.

“Part of this is technical, with people saying sell into any decent move over 2,000 with resistance between the 2,000 and 2,020 level,” Mark Kepner, an equity trader at Chatham, New Jersey-based Themis Trading LLC, said by phone. “June is now also more possible for a rate rise so that’s also gotta be coming into play. You combine that with the rally we had it’s not surprising that sellers came in here.”

Today’s report showed employers added more workers in February than projected though wages unexpectedly declined. The jobless rate held at 4.9 percent. Bigger wage gains are needed help move inflation closer to the Fed’s goal.

Futures traders put the odds of the second interest rate hike at 6 percent for the Fed’s March meeting, though projections for later in the year continue to rise, with the September meeting showing a greater than 50 percent likelihood.

The Stoxx Europe 600 climbed 0.7 percent. The benchmark gauge posted a third weekly gain, amid rallies in miners, carmakers and energy producers.

Emerging Markets

The MSCI Emerging Markets Index rose a sixth day, climbing 1.6 percent. The index jumped 7.1 percent this week.

Brazil’s real jumped and the Ibovespa had its best week since 2008 after entering a bull market yesterday. The police raid of Lula’s home ignited wagers that support will increase to impeach his mentee and successor, President Dilma Rousseff. While markets have been split in the past about whether a Rousseff ouster would be good or bad, many now say it may be the only way out of political quagmire.

China’s intervention helped the nation’s benchmark index cap its best weekly gain of 2016 before policy makers meet to approve a five-year road map for the economy. The Shanghai Composite Index rose 0.5 percent, extending this week’s gain to 3.9 percent.

State-backed funds bought primarily bank shares, while some local branches of the securities regulator asked listed companies, mutual funds and brokerages to stabilize the market during the National People’s Congress and the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, said people with direct knowledge of the situation, who asked not to be named because the matter isn’t public.

Commodities

Copper jumped 3.6 percent to the highest level in four months on bets for more stimulus in China, the largest consumer of metals. Used in everything from property construction to high-voltage cables and mobile phones, copper is a key indicator for global inflation, helping drive movements in bonds and currency markets.

Oil had a third weekly gain as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries prepared for a meeting with other major producers on March 20 to renew talks on an output freeze. West Texas Intermediate rose 3.9 percent, to $35.92 a barrel, the highest settlement since Jan. 5.

U.S. natural gas fell as much as 1.7 percent to $1.611 per million British thermal units, the lowest level since 1998, amid forecasts for mild weather this month.

Currencies

The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index fell 0.4 percent after the payrolls data, after the jobs report showed wages unexpectedly declined last month.

An index tracking currencies of developing economies advanced 0.8 percent for the fifth day of gains. The measure is now up 1.4 percent for 2016 after wiping out losses this week.

Bonds

Ten-year Treasuries note yields rose four basis points to 1.88 percent. Germany’s 10-year bund yield climbed seven basis points to 0.24 percent.

The risk premium on the Markit CDX North American High Yield Index, a credit-default swaps benchmark tied to the debt of 100 junk-rated companies, fell for a eighth day to the lowest level of the year.
