Tombini Jumps Into Political Fray, Pushes Brazil Austerity Plan
['Mario Sergio Lima']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-02-19/tombini-jumps-into-political-fray-pushes-brazil-austerity-plan
Brazil’s central bank made a rare foray into the nation’s tumultuous political arena, with its chief saying that contentious government proposals to cut expenditures and raise taxes are important for fiscal solvency.

"We need to attack this problem," central bank President Alexandre Tombini said Thursday night about Brazil’s fiscal challenges.

Tombini, a career central banker who has traditionally steered clear of politics, said government efforts to reform social security are "extremely important" and proposals to limit mandatory and discretionary spending are key to achieving solvency in the long term. Speaking in a televised interview on Globo News, he called on Brazilians to support President Dilma Rousseff’s push to revive an unpopular tax on banking transactions.

Tombini’s comments thrust him into the debate over fiscal austerity, as the government struggles to convince reluctant lawmakers to raise taxes and cut spending amid the worst recession in decades. Investors are skeptical Rousseff’s economic team will succeed in shoring up its accounts. Standard & Poor’s this week cut Brazil’s sovereign debt rating deeper into junk territory, citing political and economic challenges.

Brazil’s economic contraction in some ways will aid the central bank, creating deflationary pressure that will help shave about two percentage points off annual inflation in the first half of 2016, Tombini said. Annual inflation accelerated to 10.71 percent in January, more than double the official target of 4.5 percent.

Surging consumer prices eliminate room to cut borrowing costs, Tombini said, echoing comments made earlier Thursday by the central bank’s monetary policy director, Aldo Luiz Mendes. His comments that there is "no room" for monetary easing sent short-term swap rates higher, as traders wagered policy makers may start raising borrowing costs in 2016.
