U.S. Stocks Fall After Fed Stands Pat as Apple, Boeing Lead Drop
['Anna-Louise Jackson Oliver Renick', 'Anna-Louise Jackson', 'Oliver Renick']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-27/s-p-500-futures-drop-before-fed-decision-as-apple-falls-on-sales
U.S. stocks sank following no discernible shift in stance from the Federal Reserve amid recent market turmoil, as Apple Inc. and Boeing Co. led a slide after their outlooks disappointed investors.

Even a gain in crude oil couldn’t stem the afternoon selling Wednesday, as Boeing had its steepest drop in 14 years, and Apple’s loss was the biggest in two years. An index of technology hardware companies slumped to its lowest in 21 months. Biogen Inc. and Capital One Financial Corp. gained at least 4.8 percent after their profits beat estimates. Facebook Inc. rallied in late trading following its earnings report after the markets closed.

The Standard & Poor’s 500 Index fell 1.1 percent to 1,882.95 at 4 p.m. in New York, after swinging between gains of as much as 0.7 percent and a 1.6 percent loss. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 227.77 points, or 1.4 percent, to 15,944.46 with Apple and Boeing combining for a 123-point drag. The Nasdaq Composite Index lost 2.2 percent. About 8.8 billion shares traded hands on U.S. exchanges, 16 percent above the three-month average.

“The market was going into the statement pricing in some expectations that the Fed was either going to acknowledge slowing economic data, market volatility and China or sound a little dovish and that didn’t play out,” Brian Rauscher, chief portfolio strategist at Robert W Baird & Co in New York, said by phone. “If every other central bank says we’re loosening and you don’t think the economy here is strong enough, then investors will ultimately price in a more dovish Fed and you see this back-and-forth in the markets.”

Fed policy makers left interest rates unchanged and said they still expect to raise borrowing costs at a “gradual” pace while watching to see how the global economy and markets impact the U.S. outlook. Since the Fed raised interest rates last month for the first time in almost a decade, turbulence in financial markets and a dimming of the outlook for global growth have spurred investors to expect a slower rise in borrowing costs.

The median projection of policy makers’ forecasts in December called for four quarter-point rate increases in 2016, while futures markets indicate traders see fewer. The probability of a raise in March has fallen to 19 percent, from even odds at the start of the year.

Anxiety fueled by China’s slowdown and a rout in oil prices has hammered stocks since the start of the year, wiping as much as $2.4 trillion from the value of U.S. equities alone. The S&P 500 remains on track for its worst January since 2009, with results from Apple and Boeing offering little relief from worries that weakness in China is festering.

Equities already had a volatile day leading into the Fed’s statement, beginning with a selloff led by Apple and Boeing. Oil prices then recovered from an early drop to spark a late-morning rally in energy shares. Banks boosted the move by building on yesterday’s climb, only to shave their advance after word from the Fed.

“Buyers moved to the sidelines as an initial reaction to the statement,” said Walter “Bucky” Hellwig, who helps manage $17 billion as a senior vice president at BB&T Wealth Management in Birmingham, Alabama. “There was not a more dovish statement from the FOMC and that disappoints investors.”

Fed officials have emphasized that the course for rates depends on progress in the economy. A report today showed purchases of new homes in the U.S. surged in December to the highest level in 10 months, closing out the best year for housing since 2007. Sales jumped a stronger-than-forecast 10.8 percent last month. Data yesterday showed consumer confidence improved in January to a three-month high.

The earnings season is also in full swing, with at least 32 S&P 500 companies reporting today. Of the firms that have posted quarterly results so far, 76 percent beat earnings estimates, while about half of them exceeded sales projections.

Facebook climbed 8 percent as of 4:55 p.m. after delivering another quarter of record revenue that topped estimates as it sells more ads via videos, mobile devices and the Instagram photo-sharing service. PayPal Holdings Inc. beat sales estimates as it won new vendors, sending its shares up 5.3 percent in late trading. EBay Inc. slumped 9.5 percent after projected earnings that may miss analysts’ estimates as growth on its marketplace stalled.

Oil Lockstep

Even as the pace of the reporting season picks up, equity investors have held to their fixation this year on the direction of crude prices. The S&P 500 has moved in virtual lockstep with oil, with their relationship reaching the tightest since 2011. Today was no different as equities this morning briefly erased losses along with crude.

The Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index rose 2.7 percent to 23.11. The measure of market turbulence known as the VIX is down about 14 percent in the last seven sessions, trimming its biggest monthly surge since a record jump in August.

Eight of the S&P 500’s 10 main industries declined Wednesday, with technology shares falling 2.5 percent under Apple’s weight, while consumer discretionary, health-care and industrial companies lost at least 1 percent. Phone and utility companies rose.

Apple suppliers Qorvo Inc. and Skyworks Solutions Inc. fell more than 5.6 percent after the world’s most valuable company forecast a sales decline for the first time in more than a decade. Apple Chief Executive Tim Cook said yesterday the company is beginning to see “economic softness” in China.

Textron Tumbles

Boeing paced the drop in industrials after predicting weaker profit and fewer jetliner deliveries than analysts expected. Textron Inc. sank 13 percent, the most since April 2013, after its quarterly earnings missed estimates.

Health-care stocks slumped the most in more than a week, as Illumina Inc. and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. both tumbled more than 6 percent to the lowest levels since at least November. The iShares Nasdaq Biotechnology ETF fell 3.1 percent, bringing its three-day losses to 5.1 percent, as it closed at the lowest since October 2014.

Consumer discretionary stocks fell 1.5 percent, dragged down by Amazon.com Inc.’s 3 percent decline. Netflix Inc. tumbled for a sixth straight day and closed down 6.8 percent at a level last seen in June. Travel-related companies also sold off, as Priceline Group Inc. fell 6.1 percent to the lowest in 11 months, while Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. and Carnival Corp. both lost at least 3.5 percent.

Banks continued a rebound, rising for the third time in four days amid speculation that rising rates will help boost profits as bond yields crept higher. Capital One rallied 4.8 percent, the most since October after fourth-quarter profit and revenue exceeded analysts’ estimates. Huntington Bancshares Inc. and Zions Bancorporation added more than 2.4 percent.
