U.S. Shoppers Plan to Increase Holiday Spending by 1%, NRF Says
['Cotten Timberlake']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2010-10-19/u-s-shoppers-holiday-spending-plans-offer-glimmers-of-hope-nrf-says
Americans will increase holiday-season spending by 1 percent this year as they shop less at discounters and focus more on quality and service, a trade group said.

U.S. consumers plan to spend an average $688.87 on holiday-related shopping, more than last year’s estimated $681.83, according to a survey conducted for the National Retail Federation by BIGresearch. Of the total, $518.08 will be spent on gifts, up 2.1 percent from 2009, the survey showed.

While the slow economic recovery is still weighing on shoppers, the results offer “glimmers of hope” for the retail industry, NRF President Matthew Shay said. The findings are consistent with Washington-based NRF’s prediction for a 2.3 percent gain in U.S. holiday sales.

“Consumers will still shop with the economy in the back of their minds, but we are starting to see shoppers take steps toward a new normal,” Shay said. “As Americans open up their wallets for more discretionary gifts like jewelry or take advantage of sales to buy for themselves, retailers will begin to truly believe that the worst is behind them.”

U.S. gross domestic product will increase 2.6 percent this year and next, according to the median of 46 economists surveyed by the National Association for Business Economics from Sept. 2 to Sept. 21. A May poll projected growth of 3.2 percent for both years.

Sixty-two percent of those surveyed by BIGresearch said the economy will affect their spending, down from 65 percent last year, and 42 percent said sales or price discounts will be the most important factor when shopping, compared with 43 percent in 2009.

Jewelry Gifts

Twenty-three percent plan to ask for jewelry, up from 21 percent, according to the survey. Fifty-seven percent plan to take advantage of holiday sales to make non-gift purchases for themselves or their families, up from 53 percent last year.

The percentage of shoppers who plan to shop at discounters fell to 65 percent from 70 percent.

The number of people who counted customer service as the most important factor rose to 5.3 percent from 4.4 percent, and those who said quality was the overriding factor rose to 13 percent from 12 percent.

“Price is paramount during any recession, but when the economy begins to recover other factors take on greater importance,” said Phil Rist, executive vice president of BIGresearch, a Worthingon, Ohio-based research firm.

The increase in retail sales to an estimated $447.1 billion in November and December will be the biggest gain since 2006, NRF said Oct 6. Holiday sales rose 0.4 percent last year after a 3.9 percent drop in 2008.

The NRF uses the commerce department’s retail sales figures excluding auto, gasoline and restaurant sales.

Retail sales in November and December account for 20 percent to 40 percent of U.S. retailers’ annual revenue, according to the group. The 2009 fourth quarter accounted for almost all of Macy’s Inc.’s profit that year.

BIGresearch polled 8,767 consumers Oct. 5 to Oct. 12. The online poll has a margin of error of plus or minus 1 percent.
