Billionaire Prokhorov's Onexim Being Checked by Tax Service
['Yuliya Fedorinova']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-14/billionaire-prokhorov-s-onexim-being-checked-by-tax-service
The Moscow offices of Mikhail Prokhorov’s Onexim Group’s companies are being searched by law enforcement and tax officials for reasons that aren’t yet clear.

“Tax officials are currently conducting checks at Onexim Group’s companies,” the firm’s press service said by e-mail on Thursday.

Onexim Group manages assets of Prokhorov, a billionaire who owns the Brooklyn Nets basketball team and has stakes in banking and mining companies. Onexim operates in line with Russian laws and is ready to cooperate and supply necessary information to officials, it said.

Onexim’s main building in Moscow was being searched by the enforcement officials, though the reason isn’t clear, an Onexim representative said by the phone, asking not to be identified because of corporate policy. International Financial Club OJSC is one of the companies being searched, though the inspection isn’t linked to the bank’s operations, its press service said.

The checks came as President Vladimir Putin was giving his annual call-in show on state television. He has called for the “de-offshorization” of Russia’s economy, saying the government must move to improve courts and legislation to stop a “flight” from the country’s jurisdiction.

Wealth Ranking

The checks are a “clear warning to other oligarchs to stop capital flight, bring money on-shore, and this is likely all PR spin as Putin does his annual Q&A," said Tim Ash, head of emerging-market strategy at Nomura International Plc in London.

The 50-year-old Prokhorov, who ran against Putin for Russian president in 2012, is the eighth-richest person in Russia with a fortune of $10.1 billion, according to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index.

He also has insurance and utility holdings in Russia and his RBC Group runs a TV channel and other media publications. In December, the billionaire acquired the Brooklyn Nets and arena from developer Bruce Ratner’s Forest City Enterprises Inc.
