Centrica's Customer Exodus Speeds Up Amid Increased Competition
['Rachel Morison']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-18/centrica-s-customer-exodus-speeds-up-amid-increased-competition
Centrica Plc, the biggest energy supplier to U.K. homes, fell the most in almost two months after losing customers at a faster rate than last year.

The utility’s home gas and power accounts fell by 1.5 percent in the first three months, or by about 220,000 from 14.7 million at the end of 2015, after “significant” long-term contracts ran out, the company said Monday in a trading update. In the first quarter of last year the number of residential clients was stable.

This was “an unusually large number of customers,” more than twice the normal rate, according to Peter Atherton, a utilities analyst at Jefferies International Ltd. The rate of defections “is a potential concern”.

The U.K.’s six biggest utilities are facing increasing competition from smaller, independent companies. In March a record number of customers switched away from the so-called big six, according to Energy U.K., a London-based industry lobby group. Britain’s Competition and Markets Authority started investigating suppliers in 2014 and published watered-down remedies to protect customers last month.

Centrica shares dropped as much as 2.9 percent, the biggest drop since Feb. 24. The company was the worst-performing stock on the FTSE 100 Index.

Tariff Reduction

Centrica seeks to entice customers with a 5.1 percent gas tariff cut that started March 16. The company’s British Gas business returned to profitability in the first quarter after reporting a 22 million pound ($31 million) operating loss in 2015 due to additional costs from implementing a new billing system.

The company said Monday that it’s on track to meet its targets, which include 200 million pounds of efficiency savings in 2016 and a reduction of 3,000 jobs.

Although the customer losses are “disappointing,” RBC Europe Ltd. said it has a positive view on Centrica thanks to “robust cash flow generation, long-term growth from Distributed Energy and Connected Home, alongside a solid and growing dividend yield.”
