Corporate France Bracing for Le Freeze as Elections Loom
['Helene Fouquet Geraldine Amiel Matthew Campbell', 'Helene Fouquet', 'Geraldine Amiel', 'Matthew Campbell']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-11/corporate-france-bracing-for-le-freeze-as-elections-loom
An airline’s cost-cutting efforts stalled; a flagship nuclear power project threatened with delays; a telecom merger put on hold. Get ready for election season in France.

For French giants like Air France-KLM SA, Electricite de France SA and Orange SA, the 2017 presidential campaign is already proving disruptive. President Francois Hollande and Prime Minister Manuel Valls are getting more cautious about any change that could lead to protests, according to a person with knowledge of government deliberations. The message for business, the person said: Don’t rock the boat.

“A year before the presidential election, the government will do everything to avoid social conflict in every company it holds a stake in,” said Philippe Waechter, chief economist at Natixis Asset Management in Paris.

A year of quiet at large companies would help Hollande in what’s expected to be a tight three-way race for re-election. But it could also hamper the competitiveness of corporate France, already struggling with anemic growth.

The sense of caution has been amplified in recent weeks by the government’s efforts to pass a contentious new labor law, which is aimed at relaxing rules that make hiring costlier than almost anywhere in Europe.

After street protests by youth groups and unions, Hollande has already backed away from key planks of the proposed labor law. Limits on severance pay have been scrapped, and the level of revenue decline required before a company can lay off workers was increased from original proposals. Despite the changes, unions such as the Confederation Generale du Travail and Force Ouvriere remain implacably opposed and are planning major protests for April 24 and 26.

Elysee Summons

Though political meddling at state-linked companies has ebbed in recent years, there’s greater government influence over the corporate world in France than in the U.K., Germany or even Italy. It’s the largest shareholder in EDF, Orange, Air France, automaker Renault, and nuclear reactor-builder Areva, giving it an effective veto over major decisions at those companies. And leaders of private companies, too, are regularly “convoqués,” or summoned, to the Elysee presidential palace to be told the government’s unvarnished opinion of their plans.

Orange’s aborted attempt to merge with rival Bouygues Telecom, reducing the number of mobile carriers to three -- in line with Britain and Germany -- illustrates the extent of state power. The companies blamed the government, and specifically Economy Minister Emmanuel Macron, when the deal collapsed on April 1 after four months of talks. At the last minute Macron had sought a higher valuation for Orange shares and restrictions on how much of the company Bouygues would be allowed to own. Orange executives believe there’s little chance of reviving the deal before a new government takes charge, according to a person with direct knowledge of the carrier’s strategy.

Air France, 18 percent owned by the state, is also at an impasse after CEO Alexandre de Juniac stepped down to lead an industry organization. The airline has some of the worst relations with unions of any major carrier, and Juniac had sought to cut costs to stay competitive in a rapidly evolving travel market. Analysts at Oddo Securities wrote that his departure comes after signals he was being placed “under supervision,” with the installation of a former aide to prime minister Valls as human resources chief. Juniac’s departure “will cement the idea that reform is not possible at Air France,” the analysts wrote in an April 6 note.

EDF may present the thorniest issues. The CGT, EDF’s largest union, on Friday said it vehemently opposes the company’s schedule for building Hinkley Point, an 18 billion pound ($25.5 billion) nuclear plant in the U.K., arguing it will put too much strain on the utility’s finances. Macron plans to meet with unions to discuss the plan on April 14, an occasion that will test his willingness to stick to repeated commitments to push ahead. The government owns more than 85 percent of EDF.

Le Pen Challenge

Some government officials dispute that the recent setbacks at big companies are linked to a broader freeze on tough decisions. Juniac, for example, was fatally weakened by prior confrontations with unions, one official said. And the Orange-Bouygues deal failed because the companies couldn’t come to an agreement, two other officials said.

There’s little question, though, that Hollande has little room to maneuver. His popularity is near a record low, with just 18 percent of voters approving of his policies, according to a poll by Paris-based Elabe published in Les Echos on Friday. In the 2017 election he’ll face a strong challenge not only from the Republicans, the current incarnation of France’s mainstream center-right party, but also Marine Le Pen, the increasingly popular leader of the anti-immigration National Front.

“The context is explosive for Hollande,” said Yves-Marie Cann, a pollster at Elabe. “Between now and the election he will take as little risk as possible on social or economic issues to maintain the very thin chance he has.”
