Dollar Falls as Factory Data Challenge Outlook for Higher Rates
['Rachel Evans']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-15/dollar-falls-as-factory-data-challenge-outlook-for-higher-rates
The dollar slumped for the first time in four days versus the euro and the yen as U.S. economic reports fell short of forecasts, clouding Federal Reserve plans to boost interest rates.

Bloomberg’s gauge of the greenback versus 10 peers slipped following its best two-day gain in three weeks amid reports showing manufacturing declined by the most in more than a year in March and industrial production slumped. Consumer confidence unexpectedly fell in April to the weakest level in seven months.

Patchy domestic data have sapped a nascent dollar bounce from a nine-month low. Fed policy makers are scrutinizing whether the economy can flourish under higher interest rates. Atlanta Fed President Dennis Lockhart said Thursday that he will no longer push for a rate increase this month in light of weakening growth and still-low inflation.

“The data certainly is a big driver of the dollar’s weakness,” said Omer Esiner, chief market analyst in Washington at Commonwealth Foreign Exchange Inc. “That’s letting some of the steam out of the dollar’s marginal rally this week.”

The dollar lost 0.1 percent to $1.1284 per euro and 0.6 percent to 108.76 yen as of 5 p.m. in New York. The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index fell 0.2 percent, paring a 0.7 gain during the previous two days.

The U.S. currency poised its first gain in three weeks versus the yen and the euro.

Bad Surprise

Economic reports have trailed analyst estimates since the start of the month, according to a Bloomberg economic surprise measure.

Manufacturing output unexpectedly declined in March, a report showed Friday, indicating factories remain under pressure from tepid overseas markets. Industrial production, including mines and utilities, slumped by a weaker-than-estimated 0.6 percent for a second month. Consumers are also feeling less optimistic about the U.S. economy, with a University of Michigan sentiment index falling to the lowest since September.

That’s weighing on expectations for rate increases this year. The Fed projects two hikes, while traders see a 50 percent likelihood of a rise by year-end, futures data show. The calculation assumes the effective fed funds rate will average 0.625 percent after the central bank’s next increase.
