EPH Utility Plans Infrastructure Unit IPO in Prague, London
['Krystof Chamonikolas']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-12/eph-to-sell-stake-in-infrastructure-unit-in-prague-london-ipo
Energeticky a Prumyslovy Holding AS, a Czech energy group that has been on an acquisition spree for five years, said it plans to sell a minority stake in its infrastructure unit and list it in Prague and London.

The initial public offering of EP Infrastructure AS, also known as EPIF, will be completed this quarter and EPH will use most of the proceeds to buy back its own shares from Biques Ltd., the company said Tuesday. The unit will pay out 365 million euros ($417 million) from 2015 profit this year and plans to increase its dividend by 3 percent per year until 2020.

EPH, controlled by businessmen Daniel Kretinsky and Patrik Tkac, is tapping equity investors after expanding its business through acquisitions of power stations and coal mines in the U.K., Germany, Italy and Slovakia. The company is set to sign a deal with Vattenfall AB to buy its German assets as soon as this week, according to Reuters, a transaction that would help it leapfrog CEZ AS as the biggest electricity producer based in the Czech Republic.

“EP Infrastructure should be a sufficiently large deal to attract foreign institutional investors,” said Josef Nemy, an equity analyst at Komercni Banka AS in Prague.

Bourse Revival

The announcement came just a day after General Electric Co. said it would sell most of its Czech banking unit in a public offering and list the shares on the Prague bourse. The two potential new arrivals could invigorate the local equity market plagued by shrinking capitalization as IPOs have trickled in at a pace of less than one per year since 2009, none raising more than $100 million.

EPIF, which operates heating plants and natural-gas storage in the Czech Republic, as well as a gas pipeline and energy-distribution assets in neighboring Slovakia, had a net income of 622.7 million euros last year and assets worth 9.7 billion euros.

“EPIF’s aim is to generate strong and stable revenue in the coming years,” Kretinsky said in the statement. “As a founder of EPIF, my intention is to ensure attractive and sustainable dividend payments for all our shareholders.”

Citigroup, JPMorgan, Societe Generale and UniCredit will act as global coordinators and bookrunners of the offering, with Wood & Co. as lead manager and domestic offering coordinator.
