Nikkei 225 Slides a Seventh Day on Yen; Longest Streak Under Abe
['Yuji Nakamura Nao Sano', 'Yuji Nakamura', 'Nao Sano']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-06/japan-stocks-fluctuate-after-yen-rises-amid-global-equities-rout
Japan’s Nikkei 225 Stock Average fell for a seventh day, its longest such streak since Prime Minister Shinzo Abe took power in late 2012, after the yen surged to its highest level against the dollar in 1 1/2 years.

The Nikkei 225 fell 0.1 percent to 15,715.36 at the close in Tokyo, marking its first seven-day drop since Nov. 13, 2012. The Topix index slipped less than 0.1 percent to 1,267.75, its lowest close since Feb. 12. The yen traded at 110.40 per dollar after briefly strengthening past 110 on Tuesday, undoing most of the weakness since the Bank of Japan expanded monetary easing in October 2014.

U.S. stocks capped the worst two-day slump in the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index since February and MSCI Inc.’s gauge of global equities fell the most in almost two months on concerns that economic weakness will deepen.

“It is still difficult to buy stocks because of the yen. There are hardly any positive factors for stocks,” said Chihiro Ohta, general manager of investment information at SMBC Nikko Securities Inc. in Tokyo. “Investors are concerned about the global economy again and are turning to risk-off as the IMF may downgrade its growth forecasts.”

Global Growth

The world economic outlook has dimmed over the past six months, exacerbated by China’s slowdown, lower commodity prices and the risk of financial tightening in many countries, International Monetary Fund chief Christine Lagarde said Tuesday. The dollar fell against the yen despite data showing services in the U.S. expanded for the first time in five months.

Futures on the S&P 500 rose 0.4 percent after the underlying gauge retreated 1 percent on Monday, leaving it little changed for the year and ending the longest streak of calmness in 13 months. Banks paced the biggest retreat in four weeks, sinking along with Treasury yields as bonds rallied on haven demand.

Despite the recent selloff in Japanese shares, volatility has remained subdued. The Nikkei Stock Average Volatility Index remains 43 percent below its peak reached on Feb. 12.

Volatility “goes up when hedge funds are selling,” said Soichiro Monji, chief strategist at Tokyo-based Daiwa SB Investments Ltd. in Tokyo. “But right now they’re actually buying, or at least short-covering. And instead, the market is mostly weighed down by selling from long-only funds like pensions. In such a scenario, volatility won’t go up much.”

Drug companies were mostly lower after Pfizer Inc. decided to terminate its $160 billion merger with Allergan Plc, according to a person familiar with the matter. Astellas Pharma Inc. and Daiichi Sankyo Co. each lost 1.2 percent.

Stanley Electric Co. dropped 2.4 percent after CLSA Ltd. cut its outlook on the headlight maker, citing higher costs and weaker Chinese demand. Suzuki Motor Corp. jumped 3.5 percent after UBS Group AG lifted the automaker’s rating to neutral from sell.

Utilities were among the biggest gainers in Tokyo after a court rejected an appeal to shut down two of Kyushu Electric Power Co.’s nuclear reactors. The company’s shares surged 7.2 percent, while Kansai Electric Power Co. jumped 3.5 percent.

Steelmakers also gained. Kobe Steel Ltd. rose 2.2 percent after announcing a four-year business plan that included a dividend payout ratio target of between 15 percent and 25 percent. Rival JFE Holdings Inc. climbed 1.8 percent.
