RWE Reviving Gas Plant Shows Fuel Has Place Among Renewables
['Kelly Gilblom Rachel Morison', 'Kelly Gilblom', 'Rachel Morison']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-14/rwe-reviving-gas-plant-shows-fuel-has-place-among-renewables
While Europe’s vision of the future may be one where all power is generated using renewable energy, for now natural gas has its place.

RWE AG, Germany’s biggest electricity producer, plans in October to restart part of its mothballed Moerdijk-2 gas-fired plant in the Netherlands as fuel prices near a record low make previously unprofitable units viable. The plant previously restarted to help demand during winter, according to the company’s website.

European gas price drops have outpaced those of coal and power over the past year, increasing the fuel’s appeal to generate electricity and helping it last year overtake coal in the U.K. Europe’s booming renewable-energy use and need to meet climate targets also boost the appeal of gas plants that can start and stop at short notice and emit about half the carbon dioxide of coal.

“Gas is getting more profitable to burn,” Giacomo Masato, a research analyst at Marex Spectron Group Ltd., said by e-mail. “Although coal and gas markets are increasingly impacted by the renewables shares, coal is the one suffering the most.”

So-called clean-spark spreads, a measure of the profitability of gas-fired power plants, are almost positive in the Netherlands after languishing for four years for plants that run round the clock. The next-quarter spread was at minus 75 euro cents (minus 84 cents) a megawatt-hour on Thursday.

In the U.K., where baseload spark spreads have been positive for the last two years, gas overtook coal in electricity use in 2015, government data show. SSE Plc, the U.K.’s second-biggest utility, reopened units at Keadby and Peterhead in November which had been out of service for two-and-a-half years and 18 months, respectively.

Gas Profitability

RWE reviving the unit “signals the more favorable market position of gas,” Bruno Brunetti, senior director of electricity at Pira Energy Group in New York, said by e-mail. “The spark spread will widen more favorably in favor of gas.”

RWE has only committed to keeping the 426-megawatt Moerdijk-2 plant online until January 2018.

The “relatively positive development” of spark spreads during winter makes it “logical” to have Moerdijk-2 available, RWE spokeswoman Stephanie Moeller said by e-mail.

Changing Outlook

That’s a sharp change in outlook from just a year ago. In January 2012 it became unprofitable to run a gas plant in the Netherlands at baseload and remained that way until the start of 2016. For plants that operate during peak hours, profitability has quadrupled to about 4 euros a megawatt-hour from 1 euro a year ago. The spread was negative until November 2014, data compiled by Bloomberg show.

With profit out of reach, utilities mothballed some 4.1 gigawatts of gas-fired power in the Netherlands through last year, according to grid operator TenneT Holding BV.

Gas for 2017 in the Netherlands has lost 39 percent over the past year, outpacing a 27 percent drop in the comparable coal contract and a 33 percent decline in electricity, according to broker data compiled by Bloomberg. It’s unclear whether gas prices will stay near their current low levels, Masato said.

The share of pricier liquefied natural gas to conventional pipeline gas “is increasing and is forecast to keep climbing in the future; this will likely contribute to push the gas prices up,” he said.

React Quickly

Because Moerdijk-2 will run on a flexible basis, supplementing baseload plants when demand gets too high, it can swoop into markets when the price is high and slow down when prices are low, according to Nick Campbell, an energy risk manager at Inspired Energy Solutions.

“This reflects the ability of gas fired power stations to react quickly to short term market signals,” he said by e-mail. “Coal plants generally don’t like getting turned up and turned down very quickly so to do it with coal would reduce the life of the generator.”
