Singapore's GIC Buys 19.9% of U.S.'s ITC for $1.23 Billion
['Klaus Wille Jim Polson Jeremy Van Loon', 'Klaus Wille', 'Jim Polson', 'Jeremy Van Loon']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-20/gic-buys-19-9-of-u-s-power-line-operator-itc-for-1-23-billion
Singapore’s sovereign wealth fund GIC Pte agreed to buy 19.9 percent of ITC Holdings Corp. from Fortis Inc. for $1.23 billion in cash in one of the biggest investments Asian companies have made in U.S. power lines operators.

The transaction allows Fortis to keep an investment-grade credit rating, according to a statement by the three companies on Wednesday. Fortis, Canada’s largest utility owner, agreed in February to buy ITC for $6.9 billion in cash and stock. With Wednesday’s announcement, Fortis has done most of the “heavy lifting” on the financing of the deal, according to Chief Executive Officer Barry Perry.

“We got really comfortable with these guys very quickly,” Perry said in a phone interview. “GIC are very long-term and thoughtful investors who already own sizable investments in U.S. utilities.”

The price meets expectations, enabling Fortis to proceed with a plan to issue $2 billion of debt to complete the ITC takeover, Stacy Nemeroff, an analyst at Bloomberg Intelligence, said by e-mail.

“It removes an overhang from Fortis’s stock price a little bit,” Andrew B. Smith, a St. Louis-based analyst for Edward D. Jones & Co. who rates Fortis at buy and owns none, said by phone Wednesday.

GIC’s U.S. investments accounted for the biggest geographic share of its portfolio at 34 percent last year. It purchased a stake in Oncor Electric Delivery Co., the owner of the biggest transmission network in Texas, along with Canadian investors in 2008.

Extend Review

The entry of GIC to the deal would extend a U.S. review of a foreign takeover to 75 days from 30, Katie Bays, an analyst at Height Securities, said by e-mail. “It’s not terribly unusual to see an Asian investor involved in U.S. infrastructure,” Bays said. “GIC, in particular, has something of a track record of investing in U.S. and North American infrastructure projects.”

The $1.23 billion that GIC has agreed to pay for its stake represents a discount of about 7.5 percent to ITC’s current market value, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. There were about 100 investors from around the world who expressed initial interest in the asset and finally more than 10 that were “very interested,” Barry said.

The Canadian company will hold a shareholder meeting in May to approve the transaction, which requires regulatory approval as well as clearance from ITC shareholders. Fortis plans to issue the $2 billion worth of debt to help finance the deal once the approvals are met, Perry said.

‘Sweet Spot’

“This piece of debt is in the sweet spot for the market,” he said. “There’s a lot of demand for this kind of product.”

Standard & Poor’s in February affirmed its A- rating while lowering its outlook to negative from developing for the St. John’s, Newfoundland-based company.

Fortis was down 0.1 percent at C$40.13 at 11:43 a.m. in Toronto. ITC, based in Novi, Michigan, increased 0.2 percent.

Fortis plans to maintain the ITC brand following the transaction, which Perry said is the best approach in the utility sector. “Centralization of functions back to a big head office is not the way to go. Especially with state and provincial regulation, utilities should be close to their customers and to the regulators.”

For now, absorbing ITC and integrating it into Fortis is the main strategic priority, Perry said. “I can’t even think about future acquisitions.”
