Global Finance Chiefs Get `Therapy' as Growth Imperiled
['Andrew Mayeda Rainer Buergin', 'Andrew Mayeda', 'Rainer Buergin']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-17/finance-chiefs-get-therapy-amid-risks-imperiling-global-growth
The world’s finance chiefs ended talks in Washington soothed by calmer markets yet sobered by the prospect that the relief may only be temporary.

"There was not exactly the same level of anxiety," IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde said Saturday, when asked about the mood of officials from the institution’s 189 member nations meeting in the U.S. capital. The talks were “a bit of a therapy -- collective therapy -- to move from the negative situation that we are facing and the challenges on the horizon to a positive approach in order to identify the solutions that will respond to the challenges,” she said.

Risks to the global recovery have stabilized, Group of 20 finance ministers and central bankers said after convening in Washington at the International Monetary Fund’s spring meetings. The G-20 struck a more upbeat tone than it did in Shanghai in February, when officials acknowledged the rocky start to the year for financial markets. Since then, global stocks have risen about 8 percent, and volatility indexes have eased.

The respite won’t be celebrated for long, as a host of risks to the global expansion loom including the U.K.’s possible exit from the European Union, a leadership crisis in Brazil and an economic slowdown in China. On top of that, there’s the ongoing drag of the commodities slump on resource exporters; fresh worry about Greece’s debt sustainability; a war in Syria and a refugee crisis in Europe; and a U.S. presidential candidate who’s threatening to erect immigration and trade barriers.

Oil prices may get a fresh blow after negotiations in Doha between OPEC members and other oil producers ended on Sunday without any agreement on limiting supplies.

"There was an equal level of concern, and a collective endeavor to identify the solution and the responses to the global economic situation," said Lagarde, who summed up the IMF stance as one of “alert,” not “alarm.”

The IMF cut its global outlook again last week, warning that a prolonged stretch of slow growth has left the world economy more exposed to negative shocks. The Washington-based fund raised the specter of secular stagnation, a concept recently promoted by former U.S. Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers, who has argued that a global savings glut has left demand chronically depressed.

Avoid Gloom

But German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble said there was no cause for excessive gloom.

"We won’t stoke the alarmist talk, for which there is no reason in substance," Schaeuble told reporters on Saturday. "We have moderate growth in the various parts of the world economy, but this moderate growth has nothing to do with any crisis scenarios."

Policy makers have become more upbeat since the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, in January, Mexican Finance Minister Luis Videgaray said.

"The mood is slightly more optimistic on the global markets and risks to the global economy,” he said in an interview. “However, the main concern is growth and having slow growth basically everywhere."

Others played up the dangers.

Brexit Threat

"The risk of British exit has definitely risen up the international agenda,” U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne told reporters on Friday. “The universal view has been that it would cause immediate short-term shock and instability and that there would be a long-term cost to the world economy."

The pre-crisis model for global growth and development didn’t work, and the world is still looking for a post-crisis model, Reserve Bank of India Governor Raghuram Rajan said at the World Bank in Washington.

It’s a “mixed situation,” Rajan said at a forum on Sunday. Macro-economically, things are “not good, still struggling, still trying to find a way,” while at the micro-economic level there are more options, including making use of the knowledge that’s been built up across nations and technology that’s helping improve access for the poor.

Rajan also cautioned countries against putting up barriers to trade at a time when global growth needs to speed up, and called for coordinated efforts toward more transparency on taxes.

As in Shanghai, finance ministers and central bankers pledged to use all policy tools -- monetary, fiscal and structural reforms -- to stimulate growth. They reiterated that monetary policy alone can’t produce balanced growth.

G-20 members also reiterated that they would consult closely on exchange markets. “We reaffirm our previous exchange-rate commitments, including that we will refrain from competitive devaluations and we will not target our exchange rates for competitive purposes,” they said.

“Even though it was recognized that we’ve had better performance in the last eight weeks, less financial volatility and so on, there was a consensus that there’s no room for complacency," Mexico’s central bank Governor Agustin Carstens said.
