Honeywell's CEO Gets Back on Script After $90 Billion Deal Flop
['Thomas Black']
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-20/after-90-billion-deal-flop-honeywell-s-ceo-gets-back-on-script
Dave Cote likes to keep things loose at Honeywell International Inc.

An interview one late-winter morning found the CEO in his element: Decked out in blue jeans and a casual button-down shirt and working at his desk to the soft hum of tunes from Jimmy Buffett, The Beach Boys and Nirvana. The vibe was so carefree as Cote reeled off old tales -- like the big gaffe he made right after taking the top job 14 years ago or the story behind that signed picture of him and football star Tom Brady -- that there were no discernible signs that at that moment he was trying to put the final touches on an acquisition bid of proportions he’d never attempted before.

Dave Cote Photographer: Michael Nagle/Bloomberg

It was a bombshell when the news leaked out that afternoon -- a $90 billion offer for rival United Technologies Corp. Nothing in Cote’s slow-and-steady tenure had indicated he was pining for a deal that size. Honeywell customers objected, investors dumped the stock, and a week later, the idea was dead. But two months later, the hangover lingers. Some analysts are now openly questioning whether the 63-year-old executive has changed his tack, setting back a years-long bid that has become something of his holy grail: to drive Honeywell’s stock valuation to the same level as top industrial giants before he steps down, a move that could happen when his current contract expires at the end of next year.

“When you go after a home-run pitch with something like United Technologies, you stop being a compounder of value and you start becoming a long-ball hitter,” said Scott Davis, an analyst with Barclays Plc. “It’s a different type of shareholder base that wants that kind of risk.”

Cote calls the acquisition bid a one-off, an opportunity that just popped before him, and insists it doesn’t signal a broader change in strategy. “It’s done, it’s dead, it’s gone,” he said in a follow-up conversation this week.

If Cote sounds a bit irritated by the subject, it’s because he’s spent much of his time as Honeywell’s CEO working to regain the trust of investors who had become disillusioned by the company’s erratic acquisitions record under his predecessors. He’s had plenty of success on this point over the years, taking Honeywell from the ranks of cheap U.S. industrial stocks to the middle of the pack, with a focus on small, lucrative deals and steady profit-margin gains.

Premium Valuation

But he wants much more. Back in February, during the sit-down at Honeywell’s new headquarters in Morris Plains, New Jersey, much of the conversation was dedicated to his goal of earning the company the kind of premium valuation that investors reserve for select industrial giants such as 3M Corp. and Danaher Corp. Honeywell’s shares trade at 17.1 times earnings, while 3M, Danaher and Roper Technologies Inc. all trade at more than 21 times.

“We deserve a premium and I’m committed to getting it,” he said.

One thing he says Honeywell has going for it: sales growth. While 3M and other peers are cutting forecasts, Cote has laid out ambitious revenue targets, predicting sales will rise 5 percent in 2017 after increasing about 2 percent this year. It’s the result in part of years of proactive investment, or what Cote calls “seed planting” in product areas like refrigerants that produce less greenhouse gases and high-speed satellite Internet that provides airplane pilots with real-time weather reports.

Cote will have a chance to show that the company -- whose range of businesses spans from aerospace to chemicals to industrial automation -- is on track to outperform peers this year with its first-quarter earnings report on April 22. Analysts expect adjusted net income to rise 11 percent to $1.16 billion.

Jack Welch Disciple

When Cote, a one-time Jack Welch disciple at General Electric Co., arrived at Honeywell in early 2002, the mood was grim. A bid by GE to acquire the company had been quashed by European regulators, talent was fleeing and earnings were faltering amid large asset write downs. Investors were unsure if Cote or Honeywell would survive.

The new CEO introduced an operating system that has since morphed into a culture of cost efficiency and new-product design. He sold unprofitable businesses and expanded into others, including gas detection and security equipment. In 2010, he set four-year profit and margin targets that the market initially dismissed as overly optimistic, only to then watch him deliver.

While constantly courting investors, he has stern words for those who bet against the company by shorting the stock: “I’m probably going to burn you and I’m going to enjoy doing it.” Traders seem to have gotten the message. Short interest, a gauge of negative wagers, has gradually been declining as the share price has jumped more than threefold during Cote’s tenure. (The stock was little changed Wednesday, hovering around $115.)

Clock Ticking

Steve Tusa, an analyst with JPMorgan Chase & Co., predicts that a couple more years like 2015 -- when the company put a total of $10 billion into acquisitions, share buybacks and dividends while also expanding profit margins -- could get the company that elusive premium valuation. While there is still some unease around the idea of another United Technologies-like bid, investors do want to see a steady flow of deals, he said.

For Cote, time is running out.

The company created a chief operating officer position earlier this month and handed it to Darius Adamczyk, who was chief of the company’s Performance Materials and Technologies Unit. The new position is part of a CEO transition plan that could happen after Cote’s current contract expires at the end of 2017, according to a person familiar with the situation who asked not to be identified because he’s not authorized to discuss the matter publicly. Cote refuted the idea that a firm date has been set for his retirement. Still, he’s anxious to see the stock valuation climb over the 20-times-earnings barrier.

“As long as we keep doing what we’re doing, it will come,” Cote said. “I just wish it would come sooner.”
